GUIDELINES FOR THE
MANAGEMENT OF
SYMPTOMATIC SEXUALLY
TRANSMITTED INFECTIONS
JUNE 2021
GUIDELINES
GUIDELINES FOR THE
MANAGEMENT OF
SYMPTOMATIC SEXUALLY
TRANSMITTED INFECTIONS
JUNE 2021
Guidelines for the management of symptomatic sexually transmitted infections
ISBN 978-92-4-002416-8 (electronic version)
ISBN 978-92-4-002417-5 (print version)
© World Health Organization 2021
Some rights reserved. This work is available under the Creative Commons
Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 3.0 IGO licence (CC BY-NC-SA 3.0 IGO;
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/igo).
Under the terms of this licence, you may copy, redistribute and adapt the work for non-
commercial purposes, provided the work is appropriately cited, as indicated below. In any
use of this work, there should be no suggestion that WHO endorses any specific organization,
products or services. The use of the WHO logo is not permitted. If you adapt the work, then you
must license your work under the same or equivalent Creative Commons licence. If you create
a translation of this work, you should add the following disclaimer along with the suggested
citation: “This translation was not created by the World Health Organization (WHO). WHO is not
responsible for the content or accuracy of this translation. The original English edition shall be the
binding and authentic edition”.
Any mediation relating to disputes arising under the licence shall be conducted in accordance
with the mediation rules of the World Intellectual Property Organization (http://www.wipo.int/
amc/en/mediation/rules/).
Suggested citation. Guidelines for the management of symptomatic sexually transmitted
infections. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2021. Licence: CC BY-NC-SA 3.0 IGO.
Cataloguing-in-Publication (CIP) data. CIP data are available at http://apps.who.int/iris.
Sales, rights and licensing. To purchase WHO publications, see http://apps.who.int/
bookorders. To submit requests for commercial use and queries on rights and licensing, see
http://www.who.int/about/licensing.
Third-party materials. If you wish to reuse material from this work that is attributed to a third
party, such as tables, figures or images, it is your responsibility to determine whether permission
is needed for that reuse and to obtain permission from the copyright holder. The risk of claims
resulting from infringement of any third-party-owned component in the work rests solely with
the user.
General disclaimers. The designations employed and the presentation of the material in
this publication do not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever on the part of WHO
concerning the legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its authorities, or
concerning the delimitation of its frontiers or boundaries. Dotted and dashed lines on maps
represent approximate border lines for which there may not yet be full agreement.
The mention of specific companies or of certain manufacturers’ products does not imply that they
are endorsed or recommended by WHO in preference to others of a similar nature that are not
mentioned. Errors and omissions excepted, the names of proprietary products are distinguished
by initial capital letters.
All reasonable precautions have been taken by WHO to verify the information contained in this
publication. However, the published material is being distributed without warranty of any kind,
either expressed or implied. The responsibility for the interpretation and use of the material lies
with the reader. In no event shall WHO be liable for damages arising from its use.
Design and layout by 400 Communications.
iii
CONTENTS
Acknowledgements
vi
Abbreviations and acronyms
viii
Executive summary
ix
1. Summary of recommendations
1
1.1 Recommendations for the management of urethral discharge
1
1.2 Recommendations for the management of vaginal discharge
2
1.3 Recommendations for the management of lower abdominal
pain among women
4
1.4 Recommendations for the management of genital ulcer disease,
including anorectal ulcers
6
1.5 Recommendations for the management of anorectal discharge
8
2. Introduction and overview of the development of WHO guidelines
for the management of symptomatic sexually transmitted infections
9
2.1 Epidemiology and global burden of sexually transmitted infections
9
2.2 STIs and HIV
10
2.3 Objectives and rationale for developing the guidelines
12
2.4 Objectives of the guidelines
13
2.5 Target audience
13
2.6 Guiding principles
14
2.7 Methods for developing the guidelines
14
2.8 Reviews of the evidence
16
2.9 Modelling outcomes
17
2.10 Presentation of the evidence
18
2.11 Making recommendations
18
2.12 Managing conflicts of interest
19
3. Case management for people with STIs
20
3.1 Objectives of STI case management
20
3.2 Requirements to achieve the objectives of STI case management
20
iv
Guidelines for the management of symptomatic sexually transmitted infections
4. Diagnostic tests for asymptomatic and symptomatic people with STIs
33
4.1 Role of microscopy in diagnosing STIs and other reproductive tract infections
34
4.2 Quality-assured laboratory testing with a fully operational management system
35
5. Rationale for standardized treatment recommendations
36
6. Implementing the syndromic approach for the management of STIs
37
7. Urethral discharge syndrome
38
7.1 Clinical presentation – symptoms
38
7.2 Examination findings – signs
38
7.3 Laboratory diagnosis
38
7.4 Recommendations for the management of urethral discharge
40
7.5 Treatment recommendations for urethral discharge
43
8. Vaginal discharge syndrome
45
8.1 T. vaginalis
45
8.2 Candidiasis
46
8.3 Bacterial vaginosis
47
8.4 Cervical infection – gonococcal and/or chlamydial cervicitis
48
8.5 Recommendations for the management of vaginal discharge
50
8.6 Treatment options for vaginal discharge
55
9. Lower abdominal pain
58
9.1 Recommendations for the management of lower
abdominal pain among women
58
9.2 Treatment for people presenting with lower abdominal pain
61
10. Genital ulcer disease syndrome
63
10.1 Herpes simplex virus
63
10.2 Syphilis	64
10.3 H. ducreyi (chancroid)
69
10.4 Recommendations for the management of genital ulcer disease,
including anorectal ulcers
70
10.5 Treatment of genital ulcer disease, including anorectal ulcers
74
v
Contents
11. Anorectal discharge
76
11.1 Anatomical sites of infection
76
11.2 Sexual practices that may be associated with anorectal infections
76
11.3 Examination
76
11.4 Recommendations for the management of anorectal discharge
77
11.5 Treatment recommendations for anorectal infections
80
12. Dissemination and implementation of the guidelines
82
12.1 Dissemination
82
12.2 Updating the STI guidelines and user feedback
82
12.3 Implementation considerations
83
13. Surveillance and research needs
84
13.1 Challenges in STI surveillance and anticipated responses
84
13.2 Research needs in STI case management
85
References
86
Annex 1. STI Guideline Development Group
91
Annex 2. Declarations of conflicts of interest
97
Annex 3. Evidence-to-decision table: urethral discharge
102
Annex 4. Evidence-to-decision table: vaginal discharge
116
Annex 5. Evidence-to-decision table: lower abdominal pain
143
Annex 6. Evidence-to-decision table: genital ulcer disease
161
Annex 7. Evidence-to-decision table: anorectal discharge
186
Annex 8. Supplemental materials
201
vi
The WHO Department of Global HIV, Hepatitis and Sexually Transmitted Infections Programmes
is grateful and thanks all the individuals and organizations that contributed to developing
these guidelines to make them relevant and responsive to the needs in the field.
We appreciate the overall support of the Secretariat of the WHO Guidelines Review Committee
during the guideline development process.
Methodologist, systematic reviewers and modellers
Special thanks to Nancy Santesso (McMaster University, Canada), the guideline
methodologist, for her hard work and firm commitment to the guideline development process.
Sincere gratitude to Eric Chow and Jason Ong and the research team at Monash University,
Australia and the systematic review team Angela Barbara, Tejan Baldeh, Meha Bhatt,
Stephanie Duda, Laura Fullerton, Anila Qasim, Rosa Stalteri, Matthew Ventresca and
Holger Schünemann of McMaster University, Michael G. DeGroote Cochrane Canada Centre
for conducting the systematic reviews.
We thank Samantha Berman, Jennifer Owen and Katy Turner, University of Bristol, for
modelling the cost and effectiveness of approaches for managing women with vaginal discharge.
STI Guideline Development Group
The members of the STI Guideline Development Group (Annex 1) provided invaluable guidance
and comments during the development of these guidelines through virtual meetings and
comments by correspondence. Their meticulous attention to detail, expert comments and
feedback ensured the consistency and relevance of these guidelines.
Guideline Development Group members
Ilya Abellanosa-Tacan (Cebu City, Philippines), Laith Abu-Raddad (Weill Cornell Medical
College, Qatar), Yaw Adu-Sarkodie (Kwame Nkrumah University of Science and Technology,
Ghana), Chris Akolo (FHI 360, Washington, DC, USA), Andrew Amato (European Centre for
Disease Prevention and Control, Sweden), Mircea Betiu (Nicolae Testemițanu State University
of Medicine and Pharmacy, Republic of Moldova), John Changalucha (National Institute for
Medical Research, United Republic of Tanzania), Rizwana Chaudhri (Islamabad Specialists Clinic,
Islamabad, Pakistan), Xiang-Sheng Chen (National Center for STD Control of Chinese CDC and
Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences Institute of Dermatology, Nanjing, China), Amina El Kettani
(Ministry of Health, Morocco), Patricia Garcia (Ministry of Health, Lima, Peru), William M. Geisler
(University of Alabama at Birmingham, USA), Edward W. Hook III (University of Alabama at
Birmingham, USA), Rossaphorn Kittyaowamarn (Ministry of Public Health, Thailand), Jeffrey
D. Klausner (UCLA David Geffen School of Medicine and Fielding School of Public Health, Los
Angeles, USA), Ranmini Kularatne (National Institute for Communicable Diseases, Johannesburg,
South Africa), David Lewis (University of Sydney, Australia), Nicola Low (Institute of Social and
Preventive Medicine, Berne, Switzerland), Philippe Mayaud (London School of Hygiene and
Tropical Medicine, United Kingdom), Daniel McCartney (International Planned Parenthood
Federation, United Kingdom), Nelly Mugo (Kenya Medical Research Institute, Kenya), Saiqa
Mullick (Wits Reproductive Health and HIV Institute, South Africa), Francis Ndowa (Harare,
Zimbabwe), Kees Rietmeijer (Denver Public Health Department, USA), Pachara Sirivongrangson
(Ministry of Public Health, Thailand), Katayoun Tayeri (Ministry of Health, Tehran, Islamic Republic
of Iran), Ann Natalia Umar (Ministry of Health, Jakarta, Indonesia), Magnus Unemo (Örebro
University Hospital, Sweden), Noor Mohamed Usman (Chennai, India), Bea Vuylsteke (Institute
of Tropical Medicine, Antwerp, Belgium) and Judith Wasserheit (University of Washington, USA).
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
vii
Acknowledgement
Observers
Laura Bachmann (United States Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, USA), Cecilia
Ferreyra (FIND, Switzerland), Fernando Pascual Martinez (GARDP, Switzerland) and Tim
Sladden (UNFPA, New York, USA).
External Review Group
Anupong Chitwarakorn (Silom Clinic, Thailand), H.J.C. de Vries (Amsterdam, Netherlands),
Hans Benjamin Hampel (University of Zurich, Switzerland), Kausar Jabeen (Aga Khan Foundation,
Pakistan), Monica Lahra (New South Wales, Australia), Ahmed Latif (Public Health Consultant,
National Territory, Australia), Ioannis Mameletzis (consultant, Ukraine), Angelica Espinosa
Miranda (Ministry of Health, Brazil), Koleka Mlisana (University of KwaZulu Natal, South Africa),
Lori Newman (National Institutes of Health, Washington, DC, USA), Catherine Ngugui (Ministry
of Health, Kenya), Lilani Rajapaksa (National STD AIDS Control Programme, Sri Lanka), Reshmie
Ramautarsing (Bangkok, Thailand), Danvic Rosadiño (Love Your Self Clinic, Mandaluyong City,
Philippines) and Janet Wilson (International Union of STI, Leeds, United Kingdom).
WHO Secretariat and consultants
Overall coordination
Teodora Elvira Wi led the guideline development and coordinated the overall development
process. The guideline would not have been developed without the unwavering support of
Meg Doherty, Director, Global HIV, Hepatitis and Sexually Transmitted Infections Programmes.
WHO headquarters
The following individuals contributed to developing these guidelines: Department of Global
HIV, Hepatitis and Sexually Transmitted Infections Programmes: Rachel Baggaley, Theresa
Babovic, Meg Doherty, Nathan Ford, Cadi Irvine, Yamuna Mundade, Annette
Vester, Marco Vitorio, Lara Vojnov and Mayada Youssef-Fox; Department of Sexual
and Reproductive Health: Ian Askew, Nathalie Broutet, Venkatraman Chandra-Mouli,
Sami Gottlieb, James Kiarie, Melanie Taylor and Igor Toskin; Department of Maternal,
Newborn, Child and Adolescent Health: Francis McConville; and Department of Antimicrobial
Resistance, Surveillance, Evidence and Laboratory Strengthening: Carmen Pessoa.
Jasmin Leuterio, Laurent Poulain and Danilo Salvador provided administrative support. Adriana
De Putter and Jerome Peron managed the budget and commissioning processes. Yann Seigenthaler
(consultant, WHO Communications) provided communication and product development support.
WHO regional offices
Hugues Lago (WHO Regional Office for Africa); Massimo Ghidinelli (WHO Regional Office
for the Americas); Joumana Hermez (WHO Regional Office for the Eastern Mediterranean);
Nicole Seguy (WHO Regional Office for Europe); Bharat Rewari (WHO Regional Office for
South-East Asia); Naoko Ishikawa (WHO Regional Office for the Western Pacific).
Special acknowledgement to Francis Ndowa, who assisted in collating and analysing all
the comments from the Guideline Development Group and the External Review Group and
compiling the various inputs. David Breuer edited the text.
Funding
The Department of Global HIV, Hepatitis and Sexually Transmitted Infections Programmes,
Ministry of Development Cooperation and Humanitarian Office, Luxembourg and UNDP/
UNFPA/UNICEF/WHO/World Bank Special Programme of Research, Development and Research
Training in Human Reproduction provided funding for this guideline.
viii
AIDS
acquired immune deficiency syndrome
GRADE
Grading of Recommendations Assessment, Development and Evaluation
HIV
human immunodeficiency virus
HPV
human papillomavirus
HSV
herpes simplex virus
HSV-2
herpes simplex virus type 2
NAAT
nucleic acid amplification test
PCR
polymerase chain reaction
PICO
population, intervention, comparator, outcome
PrEP
pre-exposure prophylaxis
RPR
rapid plasma reagin
STI
sexually transmitted infection
TPHA
Treponema pallidum haemagglutination assay
TPPA
Treponema pallidum particle agglutination assay
UNAIDS
United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS
UNFPA
United Nations Population Fund
UNICEF
United Nations Children’s Fund
VDRL
Venereal Diseases Research Laboratory
ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS
ix
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
Worldwide, people acquire more than 1 million curable sexually transmitted infections (STIs) every
day. Based on prevalence data from 2009 to 2016, in 2019, WHO published estimates of new
cases of chlamydia, gonorrhoea, syphilis and trichomoniasis, showing total estimated incident
cases of 376.4 million among people 15–49 years old in 2016, with 127.2 million new cases
of chlamydia, 86.9 million new cases of gonorrhoea, 156 million new cases of trichomoniasis
and 6.3 million new cases of syphilis. The prevalence of some viral STIs is similarly high, with
an estimated 417 million people infected with herpes simplex virus type 2 (HSV-2) and about
291 million women harbouring human papillomavirus (HPV) at any point in time.
The WHO global health sector strategy on sexually transmitted infections, 2016–2021,
endorsed by the World Health Assembly in 2016, aims to eliminate STIs as a public health
threat by 2030. The key pillars to eliminate STIs are to prevent people from being infected
and to provide treatment and care for infected people to avoid further transmitting STIs to
other people. The strategy makes a strong case for expanding the provision of high-quality STI
prevention and care more widely into the areas of primary health care, sexual and reproductive
health and HIV prevention and care services. Efforts should therefore be made to strengthen
STI case management that ensures the widest possible access to high-quality services at the
population level based on simplified and standardized interventions and services that can
readily be taken to scale, especially in resource-limited settings.
Since the WHO guidelines for the management of sexually transmitted infections were published
in 2003, changes in the epidemiology of STIs and progress in prevention, diagnosis and treatment
of STIs and HIV have necessitated changes in approaches to STI prevention and management.
Syndromic management is widely used to manage people with symptoms of STIs. In most
resource-limited settings, the syndromic management flow charts are still the standard of care
where laboratory diagnosis is not available or, where it is available, getting results take several
days. Although the STI syndromic approach has some shortcomings, it remains an essential
component of managing people with symptoms of STIs. These guidelines aim to raise the quality
of managing symptomatic STIs by providing evidence-informed recommendations. In addition,
given the existence of rapid diagnostic tests that have recently become available, these guidelines
also provide guidance on how to use them in settings in which they are accessible.
x
Guidelines for the management of symptomatic sexually transmitted infections
The objectives of these guidelines are:
•	to provide updated, evidence-informed clinical and practical recommendations on the case
management of people with symptoms of STIs; and
•	to support countries in updating their national guidelines for the case management of people
with symptoms of STIs.
These guidelines include the management of symptomatic infections related to:
•	urethral discharge syndrome, including persistent urethral discharge syndrome;
•	vaginal discharge syndrome, including persistent vaginal discharge;
•	anorectal infection;
•	genital ulcer disease syndrome; and
•	lower abdominal pain syndrome.
These guidelines are intended for programme managers for STI prevention and control at the
national level and the health-care providers at the frontline – primary, secondary and tertiary
health care. For programme managers, the guidelines will assist in deciding how to organize
the services for providing STI care and how to determine the distribution of equipment and
commodities that ensures high-quality access to STI care for people.
The guidelines can also be used as an advocacy tool for the financial and human resources required
to deliver adequate, acceptable and equitable STI care for everyone who needs STI services.
Similarly, these guidelines can offer guidance to policy-makers and other stakeholders, including
finance ministries at the country level, partners in providing services for STI prevention and
care, such as local and international donor agencies, nongovernmental organizations, including
community-based organizations, patient representatives and other stakeholders.
These guidelines were developed following the methods outlined in the 2014 WHO handbook
for guideline development. Multiple systematic reviews and modelling of health outcomes
were carried out. The STI Guideline Development Group assessed the evidence and made the
recommendations. The recommendations in the guidelines were based on the GRADE (Grading
of Recommendations Assessment, Development and Evaluation) approach in reviewing evidence
and formulating recommendations. The External Review Group reviewed the guidelines.
1
1. SUMMARY OF RECOMMENDATIONS
1.1 Recommendations for the management
of urethral discharge
For people with symptom of urethral discharge from the
penis, management is recommended to be based on the
results of quality-assured molecular assays. However, in
settings with limited or no molecular tests or laboratory
capacity, WHO recommends syndromic treatment to ensure
treatment on the same day of the visit.
(Strong
recommendation;
moderate-
certainty evidence)
Good practice includes:
•	taking a medical and sexual history and assessing the risk of
STIs;
•	performing a physical examination of the genital and anal areas;
and
•	offering HIV and syphilis testing and other preventive services as
recommended in other guidelines.
Good practice
statement
Settings with quality-assured molecular testing in a
laboratory with a fully operational quality management
system and results available on the same day of the visit
WHO recommends the following.
1.	Perform molecular assays such as nucleic-acid amplification
testing (NAAT) to confirm or exclude Neisseria gonorrhoeae and
Chlamydia trachomatis.
2.	Treat according to the test results on the same day. If urethral
discharge is present but tests are negative, treat for non-
gonococcal and non-chlamydial urethritis (such as Mycoplasma
genitalium or Trichomonas vaginalis).
3.	When treatment based on molecular assays is not feasible on the
same day of the visit, WHO recommends syndromic treatment
of infection with N. gonorrhoeae and C. trachomatis and using
the test results to support managing the partner when tests are
available.
4.	Treat people with recurrent or persistent urethral discharge
based on a repeat molecular assay (such as NAAT) after 21
days, testing for N. gonorrhoeae, C. trachomatis as well as M.
genitalium and T. vaginalis and testing for antimicrobial-resistant
N. gonorrhoeae.
(Strong
recommendation;
moderate-
certainty evidence)
2
Guidelines for the management of symptomatic sexually transmitted infections
Settings in which same-day treatment is not feasible with
molecular testing or with limited or no molecular testing
WHO suggests the following.
1.	Treat people who have urethral discharge confirmed on
examination for N. gonorrhoeae and C. trachomatis to ensure
same-day treatment.
2.	Treat people with recurrent or persistent urethral discharge
for treatment failure based on WHO guidelines and review.
(Conditional
recommendation;
low-certainty
evidence)
Good practice includes:
•	if symptoms persist at review, checking partner notification
and treatment history; and
•	for people with recurrent or persistent urethral discharge,
referring people to a centre with laboratory capacity to diagnose
N. gonorrhoeae, C. trachomatis, M. genitalium and T. vaginalis
and to test for antimicrobial-resistant N. gonorrhoeae and
M. genitalium.
Good practice
statement
1.2 Recommendations for the management
of vaginal discharge
For people with symptom of vaginal discharge, WHO recommends
treatment for N. gonorrhoeae and/or C. trachomatis and/or T.
vaginalis on the same visit. WHO suggests treatment based on the
results of quality-assured molecular assays for N. gonorrhoeae and/
or C. trachomatis and/or T. vaginalis. In settings in which treatment
based on the results of molecular assay in the same visit is not
feasible or that have limited or no molecular testing, WHO suggests
treatment based on testing with quality-assured rapid point-of-care
tests or on syndromic treatment.
(Strong
recommendation;
moderate-
certainty evidence)
For people with symptom of vaginal discharge, good practice
includes:
•	taking a medical and sexual history and assessing the risk of STIs;
•	performing a physical examination, including abdominal and
pelvic examination, to assess for pelvic inflammatory disease,
surgical conditions or pregnancy and external vulvovaginal
examination to visualize any lesions, overt genital discharge or
vulval erythema and excoriations;
•	bimanual digital examination of the vagina (1) to assess for
cervical motion tenderness or pain with palpation of the pelvic
area to exclude pelvic inflammatory disease; and (2) to assess for
the presence of vaginal discharge and the colour and consistency
of the discharge on the glove; and
Good practice
statement
3
1. Summary of recommendations
•	offering HIV and syphilis testing and other preventive services as
recommended in other guidelines.
Settings in which treatment is based on quality-assured
molecular assays in a laboratory with a fully operational
quality management system and results available on the
same day of the visit
1.	WHO recommends treating N. gonorrhoeae and/or C. trachomatis
and/or T. vaginalis based on the results of quality-assured
molecular assays on a self-collected, or clinician-collected,
vaginal swab or on a urine specimen (Algorithm 1 ).
2.	WHO suggests treating for bacterial vaginosis if vaginal
discharge is present (for example, tenacious or thin) or based on
the results of microscopy, if available.
3.	WHO suggests treating for candidiasis, where indicated by type
of discharge (such as curd-like with vaginal itching) or by the
results of microscopy, if available.
(Strong
recommendation;
moderate-
certainty evidence)
Settings in which same-day treatment is not feasible with
molecular testing or with limited or no molecular testing
1.	WHO suggests treating based on a quality-assured rapid test
with a minimum sensitivity of 80% and specificity of 90%, if
available, to confirm or exclude infection with N. gonorrhoeae
and C. trachomatis (Algorithm 2 ).
2.	If the availability of a low-cost rapid test or molecular assay
is limited, WHO suggests performing a speculum examination
and treating for N. gonorrhoeae and C. trachomatis if
there is evidence of cervicitis and performing a low-cost
rapid test or molecular assay for people with a negative
speculum examination who are at high risk of infection with
N. gonorrhoeae and C. trachomatis and treating based on the
test results (Algorithm 3 a).
3.	If a rapid test is not available, WHO suggests treating people
who have signs of cervicitis on speculum examination for
infection with N. gonorrhoeae and C. trachomatis (Algorithm 3 ).
4.	If a rapid test is not available and a speculum examination
is not feasible or acceptable, WHO suggests treating people
for N. gonorrhoeae and C. trachomatis, all people at high risk
of STIs and all people who have vaginal discharge on genital
examination (Algorithm 4 ).
5.	WHO suggests treating people for bacterial vaginosis and
T. vaginalis if vaginal discharge is present or based on the results
of microscopy, if available.
6.	WHO suggests treating people for candidiasis, where
indicated by type of discharge (such as curd-like with vaginal
itching) or by the results of microscopy, if available.
(Conditional
recommendation;
low-certainty
evidence)
4
Guidelines for the management of symptomatic sexually transmitted infections
Good practice includes the following.
•	For people with recurrent or persistent vaginal discharge, good
practice includes referring to a centre with laboratory capacity
to diagnose infection with N. gonorrhoeae, C. trachomatis,
M. genitalium and T. vaginalis and bacterial vaginosis and to test
for antimicrobial-resistant N. gonorrhoeae and M. genitalium
(if there is a test) or for a specialist’s assessment (STI expert and
physician or a gynaecologist), when no such testing is available
in primary health care centres.
Good practice
statement
1.3 Recommendations for the management
of lower abdominal pain among women
For sexually active women with symptom of lower
abdominal pain, WHO suggests assessing for pelvic
inflammatory disease and treating syndromically.
(Conditional
recommendation;
low-certainty
evidence)
Good practice includes:
•	taking a medical and sexual history and assessing the risk of STIs;
•	performing a physical examination, including abdominal and
pelvic examination, to assess for pelvic inflammatory disease,
surgical conditions or pregnancy and vulvovaginal examination to
visualize any lesions, overt genital discharge, vulval erythema and
excoriations;
•	performing a bimanual digital examination of the vagina (1) to
assess for cervical motion tenderness or pain with palpation of
the pelvic area to exclude pelvic inflammatory disease; and (2) to
assess for the presence of vaginal discharge and the colour and
consistency of the discharge on the glove; and
•	offering HIV and syphilis testing and other preventive services as
recommended in other guidelines.
Good practice
statement
5
1. Summary of recommendations
For sexually active women with lower abdominal pain with either of
the following features on clinical examination (bimanual palpation):
•	cervical motion tenderness; or
•	lower abdominal tenderness:
(Conditional
recommendation;
moderate-
certainty evidence)
WHO suggests the following.
1.	 Treat for pelvic inflammatory disease on the same visit.
2.	 Test for infection with N. gonorrhoeae and C. trachomatis and, if
available, M. genitalium, to support partner management when
tests are available.
3.	 Schedule follow-up assessment three days later to assess for
clinical improvement, and if the woman has not improved, refer
for further assessment.
For women with lower abdominal pain with any of the following
conditions, good practice includes referral to surgical or
gynaecological assessment:
•	missed or overdue period;
•	recent delivery, abortion or miscarriage;
•	abdominal guarding and/or rebound tenderness;
•	abnormal vaginal bleeding in excess of spotting;
•	abdominal mass; and
•	detection of a suspected cervical lesion.
Good practice
statement
6
Guidelines for the management of symptomatic sexually transmitted infections
1.4 Recommendations for the management of genital
ulcer disease, including anorectal ulcers
For people who present with genital ulcers (including
anorectal ulcers), WHO recommends treatment based on
quality-assured molecular assays of the ulcer. However, in
settings with limited or no molecular tests or laboratory
capacity, WHO recommends syndromic treatment to ensure
treatment on the same day of the visit.
(Strong
recommendation;
moderate-
certainty evidence)
Good practice includes:
•	taking a medical and sexual history and assessing the risk of STIs;
•	performing a physical examination of the genital and anal areas;
•	offering HIV and syphilis testing and other preventive services as
recommended in other guidelines; and
•	providing analgesics for pain.
Good practice
statement
Settings with quality-assured molecular testing in a
laboratory with a fully operational quality management
system and results available on the same day of the visit
For people with confirmed anogenital ulcers, WHO recommends
the following.
1.	Perform molecular assays (NAAT) from anogenital lesions to
confirm or exclude herpes simplex virus and Treponema pallidum
(syphilis).
2.	Perform molecular assays from anogenital lesions to confirm
lymphogranuloma venereum in geographical settings and/or
populations in which cases are reported or emerging.
3.	Perform serological tests for syphilis, with appropriate
interpretation for management depending on the test or tests
used.
4.	Treat for syphilis and/or herpes simplex virus according
to the results available on the same day of the visit or treat
syndromically and revise management according to the results
when available.
5.	Treat for lymphogranuloma venereum when the results
are positive.
6.	Treat for chancroid only in geographical settings where
cases are reported or emerging.
(Strong
recommendation;
moderate-
certainty evidence)
7
1. Summary of recommendations
Settings in which same-day treatment is not feasible with
molecular testing or with limited or no molecular testing
For people with confirmed anogenital ulcers, WHO suggests the
following.
1.	Treat syndromically for syphilis and herpes simplex virus on the
same day.
2.	Treat for herpes simplex virus if the ulcer is recurrent or vesicular,
and treat for syphilis if the person has no history of recent
treatment for syphilis (in the past three months).
3.	Treat for chancroid only in geographical settings where cases are
reported or emerging.
(Conditional
recommendation;
moderate-
certainty evidence)
Good practice includes:
•	performing serological tests for syphilis, including an RPR-
equivalent test, if available, to attempt to identify active syphilis
and for monitoring the response to treatment; and
•	referring men with persistent anogenital ulcers to a centre with
laboratory capacity and expertise to diagnose herpes or less
common pathogens (lymphogranuloma venereum, donovanosis
and chancroid) and other genital or gastrointestinal conditions.
Good practice
statement
Remarks
Genital ulcer disease refers to breaks in the skin or mucosa and
may present as ulcers, sores or vesicles. Anogenital ulcers refer to
those located on the genital or anal areas and may be painful or
painless.
A negative serological test for syphilis when anogenital ulcers have
been present for less than three weeks does not definitively exclude
syphilis, since antibodies may not yet be present to be detected by
a serological test for syphilis. See WHO guidance on interpreting
syphilis tests (see subsection 10.2).
8
Guidelines for the management of symptomatic sexually transmitted infections
1.5 Recommendations for the management
of anorectal discharge
For people with symptom of anorectal discharge and report
receptive anal sex, WHO recommends management based
on the results of quality-assured molecular assays. However,
in settings with limited or no molecular tests or laboratory
capacity, WHO recommends syndromic treatment to ensure
treatment on the same day of the visit.
(Strong
recommendation;
moderate-
certainty evidence)
Good practice includes:
•	taking a medical and sexual history and assessing the risk of STIs;
•	performing a physical examination of the genital and perianal
areas and a digital rectal examination, if acceptable (and
anoscopy, if available and acceptable);
•	offering HIV and syphilis testing and other preventive services as
recommended in other guidelines; and
•	referring for other investigations when anorectal discharge
is unrelated to a sexually transmitted infection, such as other
gastrointestinal conditions.
Good practice
statement
Settings with quality-assured molecular testing in a
laboratory with a fully operational quality management
system and results available on the same day of the visit
WHO recommends the following.
1.	Perform molecular assays (NAAT) using a self-collected or
clinician-collected anorectal swab to confirm or exclude infection
with N. gonorrhoeae and/or C. trachomatis and treat the
individual infections detected.
2.	Treat, additionally, for herpes simplex virus if there is anorectal pain.
3.	Follow the genital ulcer guidelines if ulceration is present.
(Strong
recommendation;
moderate-
certainty evidence)
Settings in which same-day treatment is not feasible with
molecular testing or with limited or no molecular testing
WHO suggests the following.
1.	 Treat for N. gonorrhoeae and C. trachomatis if discharge is present.
2.	 Treat, additionally, for herpes simplex virus if there is anorectal pain.
(Conditional
recommendation;
moderate-
certainty evidence)
Good practice includes:
•	following the genital ulcer guidelines if ulceration is present; and
•	referring people with persistent anorectal discharge to a
centre with laboratory capacity to diagnose N. gonorrhoeae,
C. trachomatis (including lymphogranuloma venereum serovars)
and M. genitalium and determine antimicrobial resistance for
N. gonorrhoeae and M. genitalium.
Good practice
statement
9
2. INTRODUCTION AND OVERVIEW OF THE
DEVELOPMENT OF WHO GUIDELINES FOR THE
MANAGEMENT OF SYMPTOMATIC SEXUALLY
TRANSMITTED INFECTIONS
2.1 Epidemiology and global burden of sexually
transmitted infections
Sexually transmitted infections (STIs) are a major public health problem worldwide, affecting
the quality of life and causing serious illness and death. The illness caused by STIs profoundly
affects the physical, mental and social well-being of children, adolescents and adults
worldwide. Some STIs directly affect reproductive and child health by causing infertility,
anogenital cancer, adverse outcomes of pregnancy, fetal deaths and abnormalities and general
ill health. In addition, they have indirect effects through their role in facilitating the sexual
transmission and acquisition of HIV, resulting in more suffering among people living with HIV;
mental health comorbidities, including depression, anxiety, dementia and other cognitive
disorders; and other comorbidities experienced by people living with HIV.
Worldwide, people acquire more than 1 million curable STIs every day. Based on prevalence
data from 2009 to 2016, in 2019, WHO published estimates of new cases of chlamydia,
gonorrhoea, syphilis and trichomoniasis, showing total estimated incident cases of 376.4
million among people 15–49 years old in 2016, with 127.2 million new cases of chlamydia, 86.9
million new cases of gonorrhoea, 156 million new cases of trichomoniasis and 6.3 million new
cases of syphilis (1).
The burden of STIs varies by region and sex, and the burden is greatest in resource-limited
countries. The global incidence rates in 2016 were estimated to be 34 new cases of chlamydia
per 1000 women and 33 per 1000 men; 20 new cases of gonorrhoea per 1000 women and 26
per 1000 men; 40 new cases of trichomoniasis per 1000 women and 42 per 1000 men; and 1.7
new cases of syphilis per 1000 women and 1.6 per 1000 men. The WHO African Region had
the highest numbers of new cases of gonorrhoea and trichomoniasis among women and men,
and the WHO Region of the Americas had the highest numbers of new cases of chlamydia and
syphilis among both men and women (1).
Although progress has been made in preventing the mother-to-child transmission of syphilis
since 2012, the decline has not been substantial, since an estimated 661 000 cases of
congenital syphilis occurred in 2016. The number of cases of congenital syphilis per 100 000
live births fell from 539 in 2012 to 473 in 2016, indicating that more efforts are needed to
accelerate the interventions for sustainable and greater impact. Of the 661 000 cases of
congenital syphilis in 2016, more than 350 000 occurred as adverse birth outcomes, including
stillbirths and neonatal deaths (2,3).
The prevalence of some viral STIs is similarly high, with an estimated 417 million people
infected with herpes simplex virus type 2 (HSV-2), and about 291 million women harbour
human papillomavirus (HPV) at any time (4).
10
Guidelines for the management of symptomatic sexually transmitted infections
When left undiagnosed and untreated, STIs can result in serious complications and sequelae,
such as pelvic inflammatory disease, infertility, ectopic pregnancy, miscarriage, fetal loss
and congenital infections and cancer. Curable STIs accounted for the loss of nearly 11 million
disability-adjusted life years (DALYs) in 2010 (5). The mental effects of STIs include stigma,
shame and loss of self-worth. STIs have also been associated with fears of relationship
disruption and gender-based violence, thus undermining effective partner notification (6).
Both ulcerative and non-ulcerative STIs are associated with a several-fold increased risk of
transmitting or acquiring HIV (7,8). Infections causing genital ulcers are associated with the
highest risk of HIV transmission. In addition to curable ulcer-causing STIs (such as syphilis and
chancroid), highly prevalent HSV-2 infections substantially increase vulnerability to transmitting
and acquiring HIV (9). Non-ulcerative STIs, such as gonorrhoea, chlamydia and trichomoniasis,
have been shown to increase HIV transmission through genital shedding of HIV (10,11).
Preventing and controlling STIs are integral components of comprehensive sexual and
reproductive health services that are needed to attain the related targets under Sustainable
Development Goal 3 (Ensure healthy lives and promote well-being for all at all ages), including:
target 3.2 – to end preventable deaths of neonates and children under 5 years of age; target
3.3 – to end the epidemics of AIDS and other communicable diseases; target 3.4 – to reduce
premature mortality from noncommunicable diseases and promote mental health and well-
being; target 3.7 – to ensure universal access to sexual and reproductive health-care services;
and target 3.8 – to achieve universal health coverage.
2.2 STIs and HIV
Although HIV, which causes AIDS, is most commonly spread through sexual intercourse,
the HIV epidemic has usually been addressed differently and separately from the other STIs.
Initially, this was because AIDS emerged as a fatal, untreatable and rapidly spreading disease.
Because of that, the focus was centred more around HIV and AIDS research and, in addition,
palliative patient care programmes and community activism evolved to deal with the mounting
HIV-related morbidity and mortality and acceleration of the development of antiretroviral
therapy. In contrast, the care and research related to the other STIs were already embedded
in other programmes. Consequently, since the 1980s, HIV and the other bacterial and viral
STIs have often been addressed through separate programmes and through separate funding
mechanisms, with many HIV programmes not funding STI-related interventions or costs.
2.2.1 The syndemics of HIV and other STIs
The syndemics model of health highlights the biosocial complex, which consists of interacting,
co-present or sequential diseases and the social and environmental factors that amplify the
negative effects of disease interactions. HIV and the other STIs have high co‐prevalence, and
sociobehavioural elements, especially in vulnerable populations, function as syndemics. This
interaction requires integrated and multifaceted approaches to engage those at greatest risk
of HIV and other STIs in any interventions and programmes. This is especially essential from a
public health perspective, in increasing access to appropriate testing, linkage to treatment and
further strengthening preventive services.
11
2. Introduction and overview of the development of WHO guidelines for the management of symptomatic sexually transmitted infections
Integrating the prevention and control of HIV and other STIs requires some understanding of
the salient cultural and behavioural factors potentiating HIV susceptibility and transmission.
Individuals at greatest risk of HIV and other STIs are often members of socially marginalized
populations, whose life experiences and internalized stigma may result in high rates of
concomitant depression, substance abuse and decreased self‐worth, often resulting in avoiding
health-care settings, in which discrimination may be anticipated and/or experienced.
Stigma and societal rejection frequently result in avoidant health-seeking behaviour, delaying
diagnosis, interfering with effective partner notification and, consequently, impeding public
health control of STI and HIV epidemics. Health-care providers need to be taught about
providing culturally competent and sensitive STI and HIV care, so that vulnerable populations
seek clinical services more readily, leading to earlier diagnosis and preventing the further
spread of STIs, including HIV.
The increasing ability to control the HIV epidemic by using antiretroviral therapy can guarantee
people living with HIV long and healthy lives, and pre-exposure prophylaxis (PrEP) of HIV
means that people at higher risk do not need to acquire HIV. Although these advances
are welcome developments, the resulting unprotective sex behaviour when HIV is more
controllable has been noted to increase the burden of STIs in some populations on PrEP, which
could be averted by incorporating regular screening for other STIs into PrEP projects (12,13).
The challenge for researchers, clinicians and public health officials is to understand how best
to promote sexual health (see below) in this new age. The desirable benefits of improvements
in HIV treatment, diagnostic capabilities for HIV and other STIs, and educational digital media
create new challenges and opportunities for key stakeholders, including civil society, to limit
the spread of STIs while respecting individual decisions about sexual expression.
Guidelines alone will not achieve this shift in programming health-care services. There
needs to be a strategic shift in implementing interventions and in the collaboration between
programmes addressing different vulnerable population groups to address the common goals
and outcomes of preventing people from acquiring both HIV and new cases of the other STIs.
According to WHO’s current working definition (14), sexual health is:
“… a state of physical, emotional, mental and social well-being in relation to sexuality;
it is not merely the absence of disease, dysfunction or infirmity. Sexual health requires
a positive and respectful approach to sexuality and sexual relationships, as well as
the possibility of having pleasurable and safe sexual experiences, free of coercion,
discrimination and violence. For sexual health to be attained and maintained, the sexual
rights of all persons must be respected, protected and fulfilled.”
12
Guidelines for the management of symptomatic sexually transmitted infections
2.3 Objectives and rationale for developing the guidelines
The WHO global health sector strategy on sexually transmitted infections, 2016–2021,
endorsed by the World Health Assembly in 2016, aims to eliminate STIs as a public health
threat by 2030 (15). The key pillars to eliminate STIs are to prevent people from becoming
infected and to provide treatment and care for infected people to avoid further transmission of
STIs to other people. The strategy makes a strong case for expanding the provision of high-
quality STI prevention and care more widely into primary health care, sexual and reproductive
health and HIV prevention and care services. Efforts should therefore be made to strengthen
STI case management, which ensures the widest possible access to high-quality services at
the population level, based on simplified and standardized interventions and services that can
readily be taken to scale, especially in resource-limited settings.
Since WHO published the guidelines for the management of sexually transmitted infections in
2003, changes in the epidemiology of STIs and progress in prevention, diagnosis and treatment
of STIs and HIV have necessitated changes in approaches to managing STI prevention (16).
There has also been an upsurge of antimicrobial resistance, and there is an urgent need to
update global treatment recommendations to effectively respond to the changing antimicrobial
resistance patterns of STIs, especially in Neisseria gonorrhoeae. Effective treatment protocols
that consider global and local antimicrobial resistance patterns are essential to curb the further
spread and escalation of antimicrobial resistance globally. High-level gonococcal resistance
to quinolones, a previously recommended first-line treatment, is widespread, and decreased
susceptibility to the extended-spectrum (third-generation) cephalosporins, current first-line
treatment for gonorrhoea, is rising (17–20). Resistance to azithromycin and treatment failures
have been reported in strains of Treponema pallidum, N. gonorrhoeae and Mycoplasma
genitalium. In addition, instances of Chlamydia trachomatis treatment failure have been
reported for tetracyclines and macrolides (21,22).
Etiological diagnosis of STIs, although ideal, remains unfeasible for health-care providers in
resource-limited settings. It constrains their time and resources, increases costs and reduces
access to treatment. Near point-of-care tests based on molecular technology can be performed
during the clinic visit for the same-visit test results for gonorrhoea and chlamydial infections.
These tests can be strategically used when available to reduce the above challenges and ensure
treatment at the first point of contact with people with STIs.
To overcome issues related to etiological diagnosis and treatment, WHO introduced syndromic
case management in 1984. Syndromic management for urethral discharge among men and
genital ulcers among men and women has proved to be both valid and feasible. It has resulted
in adequate treatment of large numbers of infected people and is relatively inexpensive, simple
and very cost-effective (16). However, given the recent data on the changing causes of genital
ulcer disease, HSV-2 infections being the commonest and predominant cause of genital ulcer
disease, evidence-informed flow charts need to be updated.
WHO’s simplified generic tool for syndromic management of STIs includes flow charts for
women with symptoms of vaginal discharge and/or lower abdominal pain. The flow charts
for abdominal pain are quite satisfactory, but those for vaginal discharge have limitations,
especially in managing cervical (gonococcal and chlamydial) infections. In general, but
especially in settings with low STI prevalence and among adolescent females, vaginitis rather
than an STI is the main cause of vaginal discharge. Moreover, overtreatment is becoming
13
increasingly undesirable because of the worsening antimicrobial resistance and limited
treatment options. Updating these guidelines has considered mechanisms to mitigate the
escalation and further development of antimicrobial resistance, especially when near-patient
point-of-care tests are rapidly becoming more available.
Syndromic management is widely used. In most resource-limited settings, these flow charts
are still the standard of care when laboratory diagnosis is not available or when results take
several days. The STI Guideline Development Group members have reiterated that the STI
syndromic approach is still an essential component of STI prevention and control but that
WHO should improve the various STI syndromic case management flow charts and that these
guidelines should raise the quality of STI case management for people with STI symptoms and
not promote suboptimal care. Member States, nongovernmental organizations (NGOs) and
partners have requested WHO to give priority to updating these guidelines.
2.4 Objectives of the guidelines
The objectives of these guidelines are as follows:
•	to provide updated, evidence-informed clinical and practical recommendations on case
management of people with symptoms of STIs; and
•	to support countries in updating their national guidelines for the case management of people
with symptoms of STIs.
These guidelines include the management of people with symptoms related to:
•	urethral discharge syndrome, including persistent urethral discharge syndrome;
•	vaginal discharge syndrome, including persistent vaginal discharge;
•	anorectal infection;
•	genital ulcer disease syndrome; and
•	lower abdominal pain syndrome.
2.5 Target audience
These guidelines will be part of a consolidated set of guidelines for the prevention of STIs and
management of people with STIs that are intended for programme managers for STI prevention
and control at the national level and the health-care providers at the frontline in primary,
secondary and tertiary health-care facilities. For the programme managers, the guidelines will
assist in deciding how to organize the services for providing STI care and to determine the
distribution of equipment and commodities that ensure access to high-quality STI care for people.
The guidelines can also be used as an advocacy tool for the financial and human resources required
to deliver adequate, acceptable and equitable STI care for everyone who needs STI services.
Similarly, these guidelines can offer guidance to policy-makers and other stakeholders, including
finance ministries at the country level, partners in providing services for STI prevention and care,
such as local and international donor agencies and nongovernmental organizations, including
community-based organizations, patient representatives and other stakeholders.
2. Introduction and overview of the development of WHO guidelines for the management of symptomatic sexually transmitted infections
14
Guidelines for the management of symptomatic sexually transmitted infections
2.6 Guiding principles
The following principles have informed the development of these guidelines and should guide the
implementation of the recommendations.
•	The guidelines contribute to and expedite the achievement of key global and national goals
to contribute to achieving the Sustainable Development Goals.
•	The guidelines are based on a public health approach to scaling up the provision of care
for people with STIs to reach everyone who needs such services, including vulnerable
populations and key populations, with interventions, such as targeted screening (in
accordance with WHO guidance) for N. gonorrhoeae and C. trachomatis and antimicrobial
resistance monitoring in men who have sex with men who are receiving PrEP, especially in
settings in which STI molecular testing is limited or not available as well as more targeted
testing (in accordance with WHO guidance) around hepatitis C testing.
•	Adaptation and implementation of the guidelines need to be accompanied by efforts to
promote and protect the human rights of people who need services for STI care, including
ensuring preventing stigma and discrimination in providing such services and promoting
gender equity.
•	Implementation of the recommendations in these guidelines should be informed by the local
context, including the epidemiology of STIs, the availability of resources and commodities for
diagnosing STIs and providing STI treatment and care in the context of the capacity of the
health system and anticipated cost–effectiveness.
•	The guidelines allow adaptability that aims at promoting accessibility, acceptability and
effectiveness in the case management of people with STIs through public and private health-
care systems, including at the primary health-care level and other first-level health-care
facilities providing services for STIs, such as maternal and child health, antenatal, family
planning and other sexual and reproductive health-care facilities.
•	The guidelines provide guidance for acceptable and effective STI care services to populations
identified as being especially vulnerable to or at higher risk of STIs, including HIV infection.
•	The guidelines are constructed based on evidence of effectiveness and feasibility, providing
a comprehensive approach that is easy to follow, addressing issues of diagnosis, treatment
protocols, partner notification, health education and disease prevention, including condoms
and vaccines.
2.7 Methods for developing the guidelines
In 2014, WHO formulated a roadmap for updating guidelines in the WHO handbook for guideline
development (23). These guidelines were developed in accordance with the handbook, especially
in the processes summarized below.
The WHO STI Secretariat proposed four phases of STI guideline development, and the STI
Guideline Development Group members agreed, with the goal of producing a comprehensive and
consolidated set of guidelines for preventing STIs and managing the people who have STIs. The
phased approach for developing the guidelines was established as follows (Table 1).
15
•	Phase 1 was to include guidelines for managing people with specific STIs and for other
important and urgent STI issues and the guidelines for the syndromic management of people
with STIs (managing people with STIs using a syndromic approach). The recommendations for
managing people infected with specific pathogens were published as independent modules and
disseminated in 2016, comprising treatment recommendation for C. trachomatis (chlamydia),
N. gonorrhoeae (gonorrhoea), HSV-2 (genital herpes), T. pallidum (syphilis) and syphilis
screening and treatment of pregnant women (24–28). These guidelines update the guidelines
for the syndromic management of STIs to managing people with symptoms of STIs.
•	Phase 2 will focus on guidelines for STI prevention.
•	Phase 3 will address the treatment of additional infections, including Trichomonas vaginalis
(trichomoniasis), bacterial vaginosis, Candida albicans (candidiasis), Haemophilus ducreyi
(chancroid), HPV (genital warts and cervical cancer) and M. genitalium.
•	Phase 4 will provide guidance on laboratory diagnosis and screening of STIs.
Table 1. Sensitivity and Specificity for different steps in the flowcharts
Phases
Topics
Phase 1
1.	Treatment of people with specific STIs: C. trachomatis (chlamydia), N. gonorrhoeae (gonorrhoea), HSV
(genital herpes) and T. pallidum (syphilis)
2.	Syphilis screening and treatment for pregnant women
3.	STI syndromic approach (managing people with symptoms of STIs)
4.	Clinical management package
Phase 2
5.	STI prevention: condoms, behaviour change communication, biomedical interventions and vaccines
Phase 3
6.	Treatment of people with specific STIs and reproductive tract infections not addressed in phase 1:
T. vaginalis (trichomoniasis), bacterial vaginosis, C. albicans (candidiasis), H. ducreyi (chancroid),
Klebsiella granulomatis (donovanosis), human papillomavirus (HPV; genital warts or cervical cancer),
Sarcoptes scabiei (scabies) and Phthirus pubis (pubic lice)
Phase 4
7.	STI laboratory diagnosis and screening (managing people with STIs that are asymptomatic)
These STI guidelines focus on the management of people with symptomatic STIs, which includes
the etiological approach (laboratory diagnosis) and the syndromic approach (based on symptoms
and signs) to diagnose symptomatic STIs. To embark on the recommendations for managing
people with symptoms of STIs, systematic reviews on various syndromes and modelling work
on vaginal discharge were carried out by experts from McMaster University, the Michael G.
DeGroote Cochrane Canada Centre, Monash University and the University of Bristol.
2.7.1 Guideline Development Group
WHO consulted with a group of experts, which included international STI experts, clinicians,
researchers and programme managers and other key stakeholders in the domain of STIs and
established the WHO STI Guideline Development Group (Annex 1).
The STI Guideline Development Group participated in meetings in person and virtually to set
priorities for questions to address in the guidelines (including outcomes), review the evidence
and make recommendations. The STI Guideline Development Group reviewed and approved
the final version of the guidelines. In addition, an External Review Group was established,
also of experts, implementers and community members, who reviewed the recommendations,
provided feedback and approved the guidelines (Annex 2).
2. Introduction and overview of the development of WHO guidelines for the management of symptomatic sexually transmitted infections
16
Guidelines for the management of symptomatic sexually transmitted infections
2.7.2 Meeting of the STI Guideline Development Group
2.7.2.1 Questions and outcomes
In August 2017, the STI Guideline Development Group met to define the scope of the
guidelines. An analytical framework flow diagram for the syndromic approach was approved,
which formed the basis for the population, intervention, comparator and outcome (PICO)
questions and which evidence may be needed. During the meeting, the key PICO questions
were identified that formed the basis for the systematic reviews and the recommendations.
The STI Guideline Development Group set priorities for the syndromes for the specific STIs and
the components of management, including history taking, risk assessment, microscopy and
molecular tests. Based on the discussions, the Guideline Development Group identified the
following syndromes as important to review:
•	urethral discharge syndrome, including persistent urethral discharge syndrome;
•	vaginal discharge syndrome, including persistent vaginal discharge;
•	anorectal infection;
•	genital ulcer disease syndrome; and
•	lower abdominal pain syndrome.
Following this meeting, a survey was conducted among Guideline Development Group
members to set priorities for the outcomes according to clinical relevance and importance.
Outcomes varied by syndrome (Annexes 3–7).
2.7.2.2 Reviewing evidence and draft recommendations
Because of the complexity of developing flow chart–based recommendations, several subgroup
virtual meetings were initiated in June 2019 to review the evidence. The STI Guideline
Development Group subgroup proposed collecting additional evidence, including risk factors
for N. gonorrhoeae and C. trachomatis infections and asymptomatic and symptomatic
gonococcal and chlamydial infections and to model the cost and effectiveness of different
strategies of diagnosing N. gonorrhoeae and C. trachomatis among women with vaginal
discharge and the outcomes of the various syndromes. A series of virtual meetings followed to
discuss the evidence and propose draft recommendations for the syndromes.
2.7.2.3 Recommendations
A virtual STI Guideline Development Group meeting was organized from 28 September to
2 October 2020 to present the main discussions and decisions made during the subgroup
meetings, finalize the evidence-to-decision tables and finalize recommendations.
2.8 Reviews of the evidence
Multiple systematic reviews were conducted by a team at McMaster University, Michael
G. DeGroote Cochrane Canada Centre and a team led by Monash University, Australia. For
each syndrome, systematic reviews of studies were conducted to find studies comparing
approaches to each other that reported the effects on important outcomes (Annexes 3–7).
When these studies were not available, additional reviews were conducted that reported the
17
prevalence of the suspected STI and the accuracy of various syndromic approaches (including
risk assessment, history taking, presence of signs and tests) (supplemental material for
unpublished systematic reviews, Annex 8). Comprehensive searches for previously conducted
systematic reviews, randomized controlled trials and non-randomized studies were performed
up to September 2019. Additional searches were conducted to identify studies for patient
values and preferences (such as qualitative research designs), acceptability, feasibility, equity
and resources (such as cost–effectiveness studies). The steps of the systematic reviews were
conducted in duplicate, and statistical pooling of the results from studies was performed
when possible. Systematic reviews of the treatment of people with the suspected STIs (such as
chlamydia, gonorrhoea, syphilis and herpes) were previously conducted for the WHO treatment
guidelines (24–28) and were used to provide data for treatment outcomes.
2.9 Modelling outcomes
Because the effects on important outcomes for the people with STIs were not available
from the studies, the effects were calculated using the diagnostic test accuracy from the
studies. The numbers of true positives and negatives and false positives and negatives were
calculated using the sensitivity and specificity of the approach and the prevalence of the STI in
a population presenting with symptoms and then discussed with the Guideline Development
Group the consequences of and weight of the consequences of, for example, a false negative
(missing the diagnosis of a STI) on a patient or health system.
For the syndromic management of vaginal discharge, a static model using Excel was developed.
The model simulates a range of management strategies to identify and treat vaginal and
cervical infections. The model builds on previous work of WHO to provide a comprehensive,
flexible model that can simulate a range of patient management flow charts based on
syndromic management plus existing diagnostic procedures and tests (such as speculum
examination and Gram stain) in different various prevalence, country or clinic settings.
The strategies in the model include different combinations of risk assessment, speculum
examination, microscopy and/or available and prospective rapid point-of-care diagnostic tests
and the previously recommended WHO syndromic management approaches. The cost and
effects were calculated based on the prevalence of the STIs.
In the cost analysis, the direct costs of managing women with vaginal discharge were incorporated:
test cost, treatment cost, according to infection (chlamydia, gonorrhoea and combined bacterial
vaginitis or T. vaginalis treatment) plus optionally the costs of long-term consequences (pelvic
inflammatory disease, ectopic pregnancy and infertility) and/or partner management.
Because of the scarcity of evidence on the direct cost of overtreatment on antimicrobial
resistance, the cost of antimicrobial resistance was incorporated in the form of an antimicrobial
resistance externality tax, which can be applied to either all antibiotic treatments or to only
those that are unnecessary. The antimicrobial resistance externality tax represents the current
and future burden of antimicrobial resistance, including costs associated with treating resistant
infections, increased morbidity and mortality and the cost of developing new drug therapies. We
calculate this hypothetical antimicrobial resistance tax to be a tax associated with each single
treatment of ceftriaxone and azithromycin, whether appropriate (the person has N. gonorrhoeae
or C. trachomatis) or inappropriate (overtreatment – treated in the absence of infection).
The supplementary material (Annex 8) includes the Excel tool and describes the modelling of
cost and effectiveness of different approaches to vaginal discharge.
2. Introduction and overview of the development of WHO guidelines for the management of symptomatic sexually transmitted infections
18
Guidelines for the management of symptomatic sexually transmitted infections
2.10 Presentation of the evidence
Tables to facilitate decision-making for recommendations (evidence-to-decision frameworks)
were produced for each recommendation and presented to the STI Guideline Development
Group using the GRADEpro online software. These tables include a summary of the problem
– test (diagnostic) accuracy, summary of the evidence for benefits and harm; certainty of the
evidence; relevant patient values and preferences; and other issues, such as cost, resources,
feasibility, equity and acceptability. The certainty of the body of evidence was assessed using
the GRADE system, based on risk of bias, inconsistency, indirectness, imprecision, publication
bias, effect size, dose-response and opposing confounding. Based on the above criteria, the
overall certainty of evidence was defined as follows.
•	very low: very little confidence in the effect estimate: the true effect is likely to be
substantially different from the estimate of effect;
•	low: limited confidence in the effect estimate: the true effect may be substantially different
from the estimate of the effect;
•	moderate: moderately confident in the effect estimate: the true effect is likely to be close to
the estimate of the effect, but there is a possibility that it is substantially different; and
•	high: very confident that the true effect lies close to that of the estimate of the effect.
2.11 Making recommendations
The STI Guideline Development Group reviewed the evidence-to decision tables and the
summaries of the evidence and made judgements about the effects of the syndromic
management approaches during virtual meetings (28 September to 2 October 2020). Based
on the discussions, the Guideline Development Group made decisions on whether to make
strong or conditional recommendations for or against an approach. The Guideline Development
Group agreed by consensus. There were no disagreements in which voting was necessary. The
recommendations and evidence-to decision tables were finalized electronically via email.
According to the GRADE approach, the strength of each recommendation was rated as either
strong or conditional. Strong recommendations are presented as recommendations and
conditional recommendations are presented as suggestions. Table 2 explains the implications of
the differing strengths of recommendations for patients, clinicians and policy-makers in detail.
Good practice statements were made when the Guideline Development Group agreed that the
guidance was necessary to provide but a review of the literature was not warranted because
the balance of desirable and undesirable consequences of an intervention was unequivocal
and no other criteria would need to be considered. The External Review Group approved the
methods and agreed with the recommendations made by the Guideline Development Group.
19
2. Introduction and overview of the development of WHO guidelines for the management of symptomatic sexually transmitted infections
Table 2. Implications of differing strengths of GRADE recommendations
Implications
Strong recommendation
Recommendation
Conditional recommendation
Suggestion
For patients
Most individuals in this situation would want
the recommended course of action, and few
would not.
Formal decision aids are not likely to be needed
to help individuals make decisions consistent
with their values and preferences.
Most individuals in this situation would want the
suggested course of action, but many would not.
For clinicians
Most individuals should receive the
intervention.
Adherence to this recommendation according
to the guideline could be used as a quality
criterion or performance indicator.
Clinicians should recognize that different
choices will be appropriate for each individual
and that clinicians must help each individual
arrive at a management decision consistent
with the individual’s values and preferences.
Decision aids may be useful to help individuals
make decisions consistent with their values
and preferences.
For policy-makers
The recommendation can be adopted as policy
in most situations.
Policy-making will require substantial debate
and involvement of various stakeholders.
2.12 Managing conflicts of interest
Managing conflicts of interest was a key priority throughout the process of guideline
development. WHO guidelines for declaration of interests for WHO experts were implemented.
Declaration of interests statements were obtained from all members of the Guideline
Development Group and the External Review Group before they assumed their role. At the
beginning of the STI Guideline Development Group meetings, including subgroup meetings,
the members disclosed their declared interests. The declaration of interests statements were
summarized in a table as suggested by the WHO Guidelines Review Committee (Annex 2).
Five STI Guideline Development Group members declared interests. After analysing each
declaration of interests, the WHO STI Secretariat found that one member (JK) had a huge
noncommercial research grant from the United States National Institutes of Health that is not
related to the current guidelines and a minor commercial interest related to STI diagnostics
and thus concluded that this STI Guideline Development Group member would be allowed
partial participation. Two members declared interests as consultants with global antimicrobial
resistance and research development partnership (WHO–Drugs for Neglected Diseases
Initiative partnership) not related to the current guidelines and no commercial interest and
thus were allowed full participation. Two members declared support from a pharmaceutical
company; one was provided minimal support for attending a meeting and the other received
previous consultation fees and travel expenses but currently does not have any support from
any pharmaceutical companies. Both were allowed full participation.
20
3. CASE MANAGEMENT FOR PEOPLE WITH STIs
3.1 Objectives of STI case management
The objectives of comprehensive STI case management are to provide treatment, obtain cure, reduce
infectiveness, reduce the risk of developing complications of STIs and reduce or prevent future
risk-taking behaviour, including in other biobehavioural interventions, such as PrEP and voluntary
medical male circumcision, and ensure that sex partners are appropriately treated. This requires that
the person with an STI receive the following services (15,29):
•	have a medical and sexual history taken and noted;
•	be given a correct diagnosis (whether syndromic or based on diagnostic tests);
•	be given effective treatment;
•	receive health education and counselling about the infection and risk reduction;
•	receive advice on compliance with treatment;
•	promotion and/or provision of condoms (male or female);
•	promotion and/or provision of PrEP;
•	promotion and/or provision of other preventive interventions, such as vaccines against hepatitis A
and B, vaccines against HPV, where appropriate, and voluntary medical male circumcision;
•	encouragement to notify sex partners; and
•	clinical follow-up where appropriate.
Thus, effective case management consists not only of antimicrobial therapy to obtain cure and
reduce infectiousness but also comprehensive assessment and care of the person’s reproductive
health and that of their sex partners. For adolescents, the approach must be appropriate and
user-friendly so that the provision of STI services at primary health-care outlets can be regarded as
accessible and non-judgemental by these vulnerable people at a critical stage in their development
– a view they may carry with them into adulthood.
3.2 Requirements to achieve the objectives of STI case
management
To achieve the objectives of STI case management, high-quality care and treatment for STIs must
be available to people who need such services at their first point of contact with the health-care
system. Regardless of the choice an individual makes for obtaining advice and treatment, whether
21
3. Case management for people with STIs
in the public or private sector, STI programmes should ensure that appropriate and effective
comprehensive case management is available. Integrated care for STIs must be offered at as many
primary health-care facilities as possible to ensure readily accessible services, reduction of stigma
and promotion of the use of such facilities. This will be achieved more effectively if appropriate
training in providing STI care is given to all health-care providers posted to work at primary health
care facilities. Further, primary health care facilities should be appropriately equipped with relevant
commodities and equipment to enable the staff to deliver high-quality care for people who need
such services.
The rest of this section briefly describes the elements of case management.
3.2.1 Consultation with the person with an STI to establish the problem
To establish a correct diagnosis, the health-care provider needs to ensure that there is a conducive
environment to enable people with STI symptoms to discuss them freely. This requires the following
as basic minimum items:
•	adequate privacy for people to feel comfortable to discuss personal sexual matters;
•	provision of private facilities for a good clinical examination, ideally with good lighting;
•	an examination couch and a modesty blanket or draw sheet to cover the person in preparation
for a physical examination; and
•	examination gloves for the health-care provider.
3.2.1.1 History-taking and risk assessment
History-taking, with emphasis on sexual history, is important in establishing an understanding of
the person’s likelihood of being infected with an STI. During history-taking, the patient should be
asked about the last unprotected sexual contact and whether with a regular or casual sex partner.
The importance of taking a sexual history cannot be emphasized enough in preventing STIs and
managing a person suspected of having an STI, including HIV. Health-care providers should be
non-judgemental in their approach to history-taking and make their patients feel comfortable to
discuss personal and intimate issues about their sex life. Health-care providers need to integrate
history-taking of common health risk factors together with sexual history risk factors. For example,
as health-care providers ask about alcohol consumption and smoking, they should proceed at the
same time to questions about sexual behaviour. Once this is done, it will all become part of general
history-taking and will reduce the stigma and embarrassment associated with “talking about sex”.
A sexual history involves talking about the genitalia. Discussing using illustrated diagrams can be
helpful to health-care providers and patients alike in talking about risks of STIs in the genital area or
the anorectal area (Fig. 1).
22
Guidelines for the management of symptomatic sexually transmitted infections
Fig. 1. Common sites of infections in the female and male genital tract
Urethral meatus
Scrotum
Penis
• Genital ulcers (syphilis,
herpes simples, chancroid),
genital warts
Urethra
• gonorrhoea,
chlamydia, genital
warts, M. genitalium
Glans penis
• candida infections,
genital warts
Bladder
Testis
Vas deferens
Seminal vesicle
Prostate gland
Rectum
• gonorrhoea, chlamydia,
M. genitalium. herpes
simplex
Anus
• genital warts, herpes
simplex, syphilis,
gonorrhoea, chlamydia,
M. genitalium
Epididymis
• gonorrhoea, chlamydia,
M. genitalium
Male side view
Fallopian tubes
Endometrium
Vagina
Ovary
Cervical canal
Cervix
Uterus
Female front view
Bladder
Uterus
• gonorrhoea, chlamydia, M. genitalium
Rectum
• gonorrhoea, chlamydia,
M. genitalium
Cervix
• gonorrhoea, chlamydia,
M. genitalium, cervical
warts, cervical cancer
Anus
• genital warts, gonorrhoea,
chlamydia, M. genitalium
Vagina
• bacterial vaginosis,
candidiasis trichomoniasis,
genital warts
Vulva & Labia
• genital ulcers (syphilis,
herpes simplex,
chancroid), genital warts
Urethra
• gonorrhoea, chlamydia,
M. genitalium
Lower spine
Female side view
23
3. Case management for people with STIs
History-taking, especially personal sexual history, is important in understanding the likelihood
that the person has an STI. During history-taking, the person should be asked about the last
sexual contact and sexual contacts before that and their sexual practices, including penile-
vaginal, penile-anal, oral sex, use of sex toys and others and whether any protection, such as
a condom, was used consistently. Documenting the type of sex partner(s), whether regular,
casual or sex in exchange of money or favours, is also important.
One area in which risk assessment can be useful for a man is when he presents with dysuria
without urethral discharge. The risk assessment may be considered to be positive for an STI if
he has had unprotected sex within the last 7 –21 days, to allow for the incubation period of
both N. gonorrhoeae and C. trachomatis.
Verifying whether there has been any recent self-treatment is also important as well as when
he last passed urine since urination within the past hour or two may temporarily wash away
the discharge.
Usually, women who present to a health-care facility with a vaginal discharge do so when they
perceive it as being unusual for them (such as the quantity, thickness or smell being abnormal
for them), and usually their perception is correct (30–33). The majority will have either bacterial
vaginosis or T. vaginalis infections as well as candidiasis.
Thus, during history-taking, risk assessment of a woman with abnormal vaginal discharge
requires a good sexual history to estimate her risk of cervical infection with N. gonorrhoeae
and/or C. trachomatis. In the published literature, clinical observations that have consistently
been found to be associated with cervical infection are:
•	the presence of cervical muco-purulent discharge;
•	cervical erosions or cervical friability; and
•	bleeding between menses or during sexual intercourse.
The risk assessment needs to consider these parameters together with some demographic
and behavioural risk factors frequently associated with cervical infection, and the risk may be
considered positive for STIs if the following criteria are met:
•	if the client’s sex partner has an STI, for example, a urethral discharge or genital ulcers; or
•	if the answer is yes to two or more of the following, and she is sexually active:
– younger than 25 years of age (some studies have found 21 years as significant);
– she has had a new sexual partner in the three months preceding the current visit: or
– she has had more than one sex partner in the three months preceding the current visit.
Positive responses to the risk assessment increase the likelihood that the client has an STI. In
that situation, encouraging and discussing about partner treatment with the same regimen
as the index client, even if it is not certain that the client has an STI, is therefore prudent,
while recognizing that the commonest cause of vaginal discharge, bacterial vaginosis, is not
considered to be sexually transmitted and neither is Candida albicans.
Thus, all women presenting with abnormal vaginal discharge should have a thorough medical
and sexual history taken and be physically examined, ideally with a speculum, to view the
cervix. However, external examination of the genitalia is better than no examination at all.
24
Guidelines for the management of symptomatic sexually transmitted infections
3.2.1.2 Clinical examination of people with STI-related symptoms
Once the medical and sexual history has been taken and assessment of risk of STIs duly noted,
the person must be physically examined.
The person should be informed what the examination will entail and consent obtained. Any
examination of the anogenital area should preferably be conducted in the presence of a
chaperone. A male health-care provider must have a female chaperone in attendance, and
vice versa, at all times, unless this is not feasible because of staff capacity. In that case, the
person’s consent to be examined without a chaperone should be obtained.
The examination must particularly focus on the anogenital area, but a general examination
must also look for other manifestations of STIs, such as lymphadenopathy, cutaneous
manifestations of some STIs, such as syphilis and HIV, and abdominal abnormalities, especially
for women with pelvic inflammatory disease.
Steps to follow when examining men
•	Wash hands before the examination and put on clean gloves with each patient.
•	Inform the patient what is going to take place at each step of the examination.
•	Ask the patient to lie down on a couch and expose the genital area from umbilicus to knee
level. Where a couch is not available, the patient may be examined in a standing position,
but this should be avoided as much possible. To avoid embarrassment and to show respect,
the patient must be covered with a modesty blanket or a draw sheet and expose the part of
the body to be examined when ready.
The examination of a man must include inspection in good light to look for rashes, sores,
swellings, warts and urethral or anal discharge and general inspection including the following:
•	looking inside the mouth for signs of oral thrush, oral sores or other lesions;
•	looking at the skin over the abdomen for rashes and obvious swelling;
•	checking the pubic area for evidence of other STIs, such as pubic lice and nits, scabies, sores
and inguinal lymph nodes;
•	checking for any skin rashes on the palms of the hands, soles of the feet, thighs and buttocks;
•	checking the external genitals – penis and scrotum – and noting any discharge and other
lesions, such as ulcers and warts;
•	checking the area around the anus for a discharge, rashes (such as condylomata lata) and
warts; and
•	checking the groin for swellings and sores.
Palpation must be done gently to ensure that, if there are any tender areas, they are not
pressed in a way that hurts unintentionally. This will enable the health-care provider to identify
the following:
•	palpating the inguinal region (groin), axillae, submandibular areas and neck looking for
enlarged lymph nodes and buboes;
•	palpating the scrotum, feeling for the testis, epididymis and spermatic cord on each side, and
note any signs of discomfort suggestive of tenderness;
•	examining the penis, noting any rashes, warts or sores;
•	asking the person to pull back the foreskin, if present, and looking at the glans penis and
urethral meatus for discharge or any other lesions;
25
3. Case management for people with STIs
•	palpating any genital ulcers for tenderness and induration and looking for phimosis and
paraphimosis; and
•	examining the glans penis and urethral meatus for discharge or any other lesions.
If no obvious discharge is present, the patient may be asked to milk the urethra gently from
the base towards the urethral meatus to determine any discharge. The patient may then be
asked to bend the knees towards the chest to expose the perineum, buttocks and anal region.
If the patient is examined in the standing position, he may be asked to turn his back to you
and bend over, spreading his buttocks slightly, and the anus is then examined for ulcers,
warts, rashes or discharge.
At the end of the examination, the gloves are removed, and both the health-care provider and
the patient must wash their hands.
All the findings must be recorded, to complement the history, including the risk assessment
and the clinical findings, such as the presence or absence of ulcers, buboes, genital warts and
urethral discharge. Once the syndrome is determined, the appropriate flow chart should be
followed for managing the patient.
Steps to follow when examining women
A woman must be examined in good light and in privacy. It is important to inform the patient
what the examination will entail. A male health-care provider must have a female chaperone
in attendance at all times, unless this is not feasible because of staff capacity. In that case, the
patient’s consent to be examined without a chaperone should be obtained.
Examination of a woman during menstruation is not contraindicated, and testing for STIs, such
as N. gonorrhoeae and C. trachomatis can be performed if the woman gives consent. Urine
samples, vaginal swabs and blood tests can all be collected for STI tests during menstruation.
Before proceeding with examination, ensure the following:
•	washing hands before the examination and putting on clean gloves with each patient;
•	asking the patient to undress to enable examination from the chest down; and
•	getting the patient to lie down on an examination couch in good light; a woman should not
be examined standing up and should be covered with a draw sheet or a modesty blanket,
exposing only the part of the body to be examined when ready.
The inspection must be general to ensure that other conditions are captured. The examination
must include the following steps:
•	looking inside the mouth for signs of oral thrush, oral sores or other lesions;
•	looking at the skin over the abdomen for rashes and any obvious swellings;
•	checking the pubic area for evidence of other STIs, such as pubic lice and nits, scabies, sores
and inguinal lymph nodes;
•	checking for any skin rashes on the palms of the hands and soles of the feet;
•	checking the thighs and buttocks for rashes;
•	checking the area around the anus for rashes and warts;
•	checking the groin for swellings and sores; and
•	checking the external genitalia and taking note of any discharge, or other lesions, such as
warts, condylomata lata and excoriations on the vulva.
26
Guidelines for the management of symptomatic sexually transmitted infections
Palpation must be done gently to avoid hurting unintentionally. The abdomen must be palpated
gently, watching the face for any indication of areas of tenderness and feeling for any masses
and swellings, including pregnancy. In women with lower abdominal pain or vaginal discharge,
the examination must focus on the pelvis to assess for signs of pelvic inflammatory disease (see
section on pelvic inflammatory disease).
The general palpation by the health-care provider should include the groin, axillae,
submandibular areas and neck for enlarged lymph nodes, noting whether they are painful.
Then the patient should be asked to bend her knees towards the chest and then separate them
and the following should continue to be observed:
•	inspection of the vulva, perineum (between the vagina in front, the buttocks behind and the
medial sides of the thighs on both sides), and the perianal skin for rashes, sores, warts and
swelling;
•	inspect between the labia of the vagina and the urethral opening for any obvious lesions or
discharge and any vaginal discharge;
•	note: the colour of the discharge, whether it is yellow, white and/or blood stained; the smell,
whether a “fishy smell” can be discerned; and the type of vaginal discharge: whether it is
frothy, thick or sticky;
•	two fingers should be inserted into the vagina and a bimanual examination carried out with
one hand on the pelvic area of the abdomen and the other inside the vagina, feeling for
masses and tenderness and checking for cervical motion tenderness by moving the cervix
gently from side to side to elicit uterine and/or adnexal tenderness (see pelvic inflammatory
disease); and
•	a speculum examination should be performed next to visualize the cervix and vaginal mucosa.
3.2.1.3 How to perform a speculum examination
A speculum is a medical device used to examine inside the vagina. A speculum examination is
often performed alongside a bimanual examination as part of a good practice gynaecological
workup, especially for women with anogenital symptoms. Metal specula must be sterilized
before use, and plastic specula must not be reused.
Before a speculum examination, the patient should be informed about the device, what the
health-care provider is going to do and the patient reassured that the procedure should not
be painful but if the patient is uncomfortable or experiences pain, the procedure will be
discontinued.
Explain that the patient needs to remove the underwear and lie on the examination couch,
covering herself with the sheet provided. The patient must be provided with privacy to undress.
In preparation for performing a speculum examination, the following steps should be taken.
•	The patient should have an empty bladder to make the examination more comfortable;
•	The speculum should be properly sterilized before use.
•	All the secondary equipment needed should be laid out ready on a trolley, such as warm
water, gloves, swabs and a waste disposal bin.
•	The light source should be prepared and tested before beginning the procedure;
•	The privacy screen, curtain or door should be closed for the examination.
27
3. Case management for people with STIs
The procedure should be done as follows.
•	Wet the speculum with clean warm water before inserting it;
•	Insert the first finger of the gloved hand in the opening of the woman’s vagina (some
clinicians use the tip of the speculum instead of a finger for this step). As the finger is put in,
it is gently pushed downward on the muscle surrounding the vagina, and then the speculum
is inserted slowly while asking the woman to relax her muscles;
•	With the other hand, the speculum is held with the speculum blades together between the
index and middle fingers and turned sideways as the speculum is slipped into the vagina, while
taking care not to press on the urethra or clitoris because these areas are very sensitive.
•	When the speculum is halfway in, it is turned so the handle is facing downward.
(Note: some examination couches do not have enough room to insert the speculum
with the handle down – in this case, it is turned up)
•	The blades of the speculum are then gently opened a little while searching for the cervix.
•	The speculum is then moved around slowly and gently until the cervix can be seen between
the blades – at this point the screw (or otherwise lock on the speculum) can be tightened so
it will stay in place.
•	Now the cervix can be examined, in good light, and it should look pink, round and smooth.
There may be small yellowish cysts, areas of redness around the opening of the cervix
(cervical os) or a clear mucoid discharge – these are normal findings.
•	Look for signs of cervical infection by checking for yellowish discharge or easy bleeding when
the cervix is touched with a swab and any abnormal growths or sores.
•	Note whether the cervical os is open or closed and whether there is any discharge or bleeding.
•	If there was blood in the vagina, the clinician should look for any biological tissue coming
from the cervix, which could be signs of induced abortion or miscarriage.
•	If any specimens are to be taken, this would be the stage to perform endocervical swabs,
swabs from the posterior fourchette of the vagina – as well as biopsy, if applicable.
•	To remove the speculum, it should first be gently pulled out until the blades are clear of the
cervix. Then the blades are brought together but not completely closed to avoid pinching the
vaginal wall and gently pulled out, turning the speculum gently to look at the walls of the
vagina.
•	The patient can then be thanked and informed that the procedure has been completed and
to get dressed while the patient’s privacy is observed. After that, the patient can wash her
hands and be asked to sit down to receive feedback on the findings of the examination.
•	The health-care provider should remove the gloves before touching anything, wash hands
and sit with the patient to give feedback on the examination findings.
As noted above, the next step is either to establish the diagnosis at this stage after the history-
taking and examination and manage the patient syndromically using the appropriate flow chart(s)
based on the examination findings or proceed to perform any additional diagnostic tests.
28
Guidelines for the management of symptomatic sexually transmitted infections
3.2.1.4 How to perform an anoscopy examination
An anoscope is an instrument used for visualizing the anus and lowest portion of the rectum. It
is tubular and can be inserted with a lubricant into the anal canal. Once inserted, the examiner
visualizes the walls of the anus and lower rectum using an appropriate light source. It can be
used to identify abnormalities, such as haemorrhoids, inflammation and tumours in this part of
the gastrointestinal tract.
Anoscopy can be performed within a health-care facility if sufficient training has been
undertaken and equipment such as an examination couch, gloves, a light source and lubricants
are available. No special preparations are needed, such as emptying the bowels or topical
anaesthetic. However, some health facilities apply a topical anaesthetic 30 minutes before the
procedure. Caution is needed among patients who have undergone recent anal surgery or are
known to have anal fissures.
Before performing the procedure, the patient should be informed about the device, what the
health-care provider is going to do and the patient informed that the procedure is painless, but
pressure similar to that of a bowel movement may be felt.
In preparation for performing anoscopy, the following steps should be taken.
•	The anoscope should have been properly sterilized before use.
•	All the secondary equipment needed should be laid out ready on a trolley, such as lubricant,
gloves, light source and cotton swabs, preferably with large tips.
•	Privacy should be assured – a privacy screen, curtain or door that can be closed for the
examination.
The procedure should be carried out as follows.
•	Lie the patient down in the left lateral position.
•	Separate the buttocks or ask the patient or an assistant to help and examine the perianal
area for warts, haemorrhoids or polyp prolapses.
•	Perform a digital rectal examination with a lubricated, gloved index finger, taking note of
sphincter tone and any prostate abnormalities.
•	Remove the finger and change glove to a new one.
•	Lubricate the anoscope and insert it into the anus gently and, pointing the anoscope towards
the umbilicus, advance it completely into the anus or as far as the patient can tolerate;
•	Remove the obturator of the anoscope to examine the anal mucosa, removing any faecal
matter with a swab.
•	Check for blood, mucus, pus or haemorrhoidal tissue.
•	Gently remove the anoscope, when done, and observe the sides of the anal canal in the
process.
•	The health-care provider should remove the gloves before touching anything, and both the
provider and the patient must wash their hands before the provider sits with the patient to
give feedback on the examination findings.
Any observation of suspicious growths or bleeding lesions should be referred for
gynaecological assessment.
29
3. Case management for people with STIs
3.2.1.5 Establishing a diagnosis
Traditionally, laboratory tests have been used to address STI prevention and control to achieve
the following.
•	to provide a definitive diagnosis, thus, allowing for cause-guided treatment;
•	to provide screening services for asymptomatic individuals at risk of infection;
•	to provide statistical information on the prevalence of various infections;
•	to determine the antimicrobial susceptibility of causative organisms; and
•	to assist in managing sex partners.
Thus, ideally, everyone presenting with a condition assumed to be an STI should be diagnosed
through a process of obtaining the medical and sexual history, physical examination and
laboratory testing of relevant specimens from either the lesion, blood or urine. The diagnosis
could then be made through a combination of direct microscopy in syndromes with genital
discharges, culture of the organisms, such as N. gonorrhoeae, serological testing as in syphilis
and HIV infection and molecular detection. The health-care level at which these tests can
be done varies with availability of resources, both financial and human, as well as the skills
required to conduct the tests. Regardless of which system is set up for diagnosing STIs, there
should be a mechanism to refer to a level at which more tests can be done, especially for
patients with recurrent or persistent infections and those with unusual clinical presentations.
However, in many parts of the world, such a process is constrained by a lack of inexpensive
diagnostic tests, and especially in the regions where the burden of STIs is highest and laboratories
and laboratory technicians have insufficient capacity. In many instances, the appropriate reagents
necessary to detect STI pathogens are not locally available and would be expensive to procure.
Further, even if laboratory-based tests were available, substantial financial resources would
be required for such an approach and probably unaffordable for the programme and for the
patients. A further disadvantage of laboratory-based etiological diagnosis is the delay in access to
treatment if treatment is withheld until the results are available.
Affordable, rapid point-of-care diagnostic tests for STIs provide a means to strengthen the
diagnosis of STIs more readily. This would be such a welcome advance in the diagnosis of
STIs, especially for women with vaginal discharge, a syndrome commonly labelled as an STI
syndrome but that neither indicates nor predicts gonococcal or chlamydial cervical infections
among women. Genital ulcers would also benefit enormously from a rapid point-of-care
test, since recent studies indicate that most genital ulcers are caused by viral infections,
especially HSV-2. The rapid diagnostic tests for gonococcal and chlamydial infections currently
commercially in circulation are of poor sensitivity and specificity and expensive. Their use
would negatively affect the reliability of laboratory testing for STI diagnosis. However, rapid
diagnostic tests for syphilis (treponemal test) are available and cheap and allow for a same-day
“screen and treat” approach. Dual HIV and syphilis rapid tests are also available and provide
an opportunity for increasing access to HIV and syphilis testing.
In the absence of diagnostic tests, a syndrome-based approach to managing people with
STIs has been developed and adopted in many countries. The approach is more rational and
scientific than a clinical approach in which a health-care provider reaches a diagnosis based
on the clinical appearance of the lesion or the nature of a genital discharge. Several studies
have shown that clinical judgement based on the experience and appearance of an ulcer, for
example, has poor sensitivity in the diagnosis (34–36).
30
Guidelines for the management of symptomatic sexually transmitted infections
The syndromic management approach is based on identifying consistent groups of symptoms
and easily recognized signs (syndromes) and providing treatment that will take care of most
of or the most serious organisms responsible for producing the syndrome. By giving treatment
for the most common causative pathogens for a particular syndrome, the syndromic approach,
generally, has high sensitivity at the expense of specificity, thus resulting in overtreatment.
WHO developed simplified flow charts to guide health-care workers in implementing the
syndromic management of STIs. These WHO flow charts have been designed to be adapted at
the local level, using locally available data and information.
3.2.1.6 Health education and counselling
People seeking care for STIs are especially worried about the condition and are more receptive
to education messages than at other times. This is probably because they are aware of their
vulnerability when they face an infection. Health-care providers should take advantage of this
time to educate their patients about STIs, including HIV, and how they are transmitted and
acquired. Further, the counselling can help them to assess their own risk and take responsibility
to reduce the risk, if feasible, or change sexual behaviour and start using preventive
interventions, such as the male and female condoms.
Health education is the provision of accurate and evidence-informed information about STIs so
that a person becomes knowledgeable about the subject and can make informed choice.
Counselling is a two-way interaction between patients and provider intended to help the
patients to understand themselves better in their feelings, attitudes, values and beliefs and to
empower them to execute changes for healthy living in their life.
The key messages to give during an encounter with a person seeking care for STIs is how the
infection may have been contracted, how to prevent future infections and the importance
of completing a course of treatment and abstaining from further sexual intercourse until
treatment has been completed and the infection has been controlled or cured. This should be
emphasized to patients. However, patients should also be strongly advised to use condoms if
abstinence from sex is not possible.
During the encounter with the patients, screening for other infections should be offered, especially
for HIV infection and syphilis, both of which have rapid diagnostic tests currently available.
Health education and counselling are covered in other relevant WHO publications, such as Brief
sexuality-related communication: recommendations for a public health approach (37).
3.2.1.7 Partner notification and treatment
A person with STIs has contracted the infection from a sex partner who also had the infection.
Equally, from the time that the attending (index) patient was infected, he or she has also been
infectious – able to transmit the STI to other sex partners or the same partner (the source of
the infection) who, in the meantime, may have been treated. Thus, the chain of transmission
of the STI can be broken only if all the mutual sex partners are treated for the infections before
they have further sex with each other.
Many STIs, such as gonococcal infection, chlamydial infections, syphilis and HIV, are
asymptomatic, and people may not be aware that they are infected. Thus, partner notification
can be one way to detect and treat asymptomatic individuals.
Some reproductive tract infections are not sexually transmitted, such as the bacteria
responsible for bacterial vaginosis among women with vaginal discharge. Although C. albicans
31
3. Case management for people with STIs
can be sexually transmitted, it is not classified as an STI. The sex partners of people with
candidiasis do not need treatment unless they exhibit symptoms. Partner notification therefore
needs to be approached with caution for women with vaginal discharge since they may not
have a sexually transmitted pathogen. This is one reason affordable, rapid diagnostic tests to
screen for STIs in such situations and guide appropriate partner notification and treatment are
so urgently needed.
There are several approaches to partner notification for STIs. The patient can be issued with a
contact-tracing card to give to the sex partner(s) to invite them to attend for an assessment for
STIs and be treated accordingly (patient referral partner notification). The other method is for
the health-care provider to obtain contact details from the index patient and then to attempt
to contact the sex partners (provider referral partner notification).
Other methods of partner notification and treatment are variations of these two in which the
index case may be given a prescription or medicines to give to their sex partners without the
health-care provider having the opportunity to examine the sex partner (expedited partner
therapy). Another method, sometimes referred to as contractual partner referral, is agreement
between the service provider and the index patient that the latter will reach the sex partner(s)
within an agreed time frame, after which the health-care provider will then try to contact
the sex partner if the agreement period has elapsed without the sex partners presenting for
examination and treatment.
Regardless of which method of partner notification and treatment is followed, confidentiality,
non-judgemental attitudes and absence of coercion must be observed. Health education and
counselling are important to equip people with STIs to embark on informing their sex partners
about their STI.
3.2.1.8 Follow-up and referral for people with STIs
WHO encourages that people diagnosed with STIs be provided immediate treatment and, if
any diagnostic tests are to be carried out, that they do not delay the provision of treatment.
This would ensure an immediate break in the chain of transmission and prevent STI-related
complications and long-term sequelae of STIs.
Giving treatment during the same visit reduces infectiousness and onward transmission, even
more so if single-dose therapies are available.
If effective medicines are given and any test results are available on the same visit, then
follow-up may be restricted only to those with persistent symptoms after a stipulated period.
This will reduce costs for both the patient and the health-care system. Treatment given on the
same visit is especially relevant in settings in which patient return rates are inconsistent for
several reasons, such as distances to the clinic, user fees, transport fees, user-friendliness of
health services and attitudes of health-care providers.
Follow-up may be specifically requested in certain conditions, such as a woman being
treated for acute pelvic inflammatory disease as an outpatient or a neonate with ophthalmia
neonatorum to ensure that the treatment has been effective, since delays in cure may result in
severe consequences such as loss of eyesight.
The patient may return for further assessment either because the condition has not resolved
when treatment ends or it has recurred. The health-care provider will need to determine
whether this resulted from poor compliance, which is unlikely if single-dose therapy was given
and taken on the same day as the patient attended the clinic or the patient has a persistent
infection because of antimicrobial resistance or has been reinfected.
32
Guidelines for the management of symptomatic sexually transmitted infections
Depending on the assessment, health-care providers have the following options for treatment:
•	poor compliance – such as a patient taking a 7-day or 21-day course of doxycycline for
chlamydial infections, including for lymphogranuloma venereum;
•	reinfection – perhaps because sex took place, without a condom, with an untreated sex
partner or a new partner;
•	antimicrobial resistance – this is of particular importance in gonococcal and M. genitalium
infections since antimicrobial resistance in N. gonorrhoeae and M. genitalium are being
experienced with recommended treatments for these infections; and
•	the presence of an untreated infection – such as T. vaginalis and/or M. genitalium among men
with urethral discharge treated only for N. gonorrhoeae and C. trachomatis at the first visit.
The health-care provider should assess the most likely scenario for the individual and treat
appropriately.
Sometimes the patient needs to be referred to another level of care. The health-care provider at
the first point of care should then determine whether the referral should be made to clinicians
who have extensive specialized training or experience in diagnosing, treating and following
up complex STI cases or to a facility with laboratory-based tests to exclude antimicrobial
resistance or to any other specialist centre. For example, someone with an abnormality in the
anorectal area may need to be referred to a colorectal surgeon or oncologist and someone with
a testicular problem to a urologist.
In any specific country or setting, providers of care for people with STIs need to have
information on referral channels at their disposal for complex genitourinary symptoms they feel
unable to handle.
33
The accurate identification of asymptomatic and symptomatic STIs, as well as improvements
in the sensitivity and specificity of the syndromic approach, all depend on the availability of
diagnostic tests and a screening strategy. High-quality diagnostic tests for STIs are available
but are often expensive, frequently labour intensive and, at this stage, not suitable for use
as rapid point-of-care tests. This situation is further complicated by a lack of interest from
pharmaceutical companies in developing low-cost, high-quality diagnostic tests for diseases
that are more prevalent in low- and middle-income countries, since they perceive that the
market is not sufficient to recover research and development costs and make a profit.
Gold-standard tests with high levels of sensitivity and specificity are generally used to develop
management flow charts and to subsequently evaluate and improve them, but these tests are
typically not available for the day-to-day management of people with STIs.
For purposes of equity, diagnostic tests should be affordable, sensitive, specific, user friendly,
rapid and robust, equipment-free and deliverable – thus making them accessible. Equally,
the tests should be acceptable – which is usually achieved by making the testing procedure
minimally invasive.
Currently, however, there are often trade-offs. Nucleic acid amplification testing (NAAT) is very
sensitive and specific and can usually be done on non-invasive samples such as urine but often
takes 3–4 hours to complete, is expensive and is usually based in a laboratory rather than at a
health facility where people present with STI symptoms. Other rapid immunochromatographic
strip tests may be less sensitive, but results may be available in 30 minutes or less (38).
Two rapid immunochromatographic strip tests for N. gonorrhoeae were evaluated in Brazil
and Benin and had sensitivity of 60% and 70%, respectively, specificity of 91% and 97%,
respectively, and a positive predictive value of 56% in Brazil (prevalence of N. gonorrhoeae
15%) and 55% in Benin, where the prevalence of N. gonorrhoeae was 5% (39,40). However, it
has been suggested that these rapid tests, despite their lower sensitivity, may be as efficient as
or more efficient than the more sensitive gold-standard tests in treating gonococcal infections,
given the proportion of people who do not return for the results of the more sensitive test.
Thus, in day-to-day practice, if longer waiting times or having to return for test results leads
to loss to follow-up, the less sensitive tests may well result in more people with STIs receiving
treatment (41). Several platforms and assays are being developed to be more portable and
easier to operate and to be used at the primary point of care and give rapid turnaround
times for results, with accuracy similar to that of laboratory-based NAAT (42–44). Such
considerations were deliberated in the STI Guideline Development Group meeting to propose
acceptable performance characteristics of prospective point-of-care tests that may improve the
treatment flow charts and minimize the undesirable consequences of untreated STIs.
There are several rapid diagnostic tests for screening for syphilis. Most use whole blood,
plasma or serum and can be performed within 5–30 minutes. Based on a meta-analysis,
sensitivity ranges from 75% to 99% and specificity from 92% to 99% compared with
Treponema pallidum haemagglutination assay (TPHA) and Treponema pallidum particle
agglutination (TPPA) tests (45). A combination of rapid diagnostic tests for HIV and syphilis
(dual HIV and syphilis test) provides potential for increasing syphilis testing. These tests have
high sensitivity and specificity, are more cost-effective than a single rapid diagnostic test and
are acceptable in terms of turnaround time, cost and a single finger prick (46).
4. DIAGNOSTIC TESTS FOR ASYMPTOMATIC
AND SYMPTOMATIC PEOPLE WITH STIs
34
Guidelines for the management of symptomatic sexually transmitted infections
Additionally, already in existence are traditional rapid tests, including microscopy (Gram stain,
wet mount and dark field), pH strip tests, the Whiff test using potassium hydroxide solution
and the rapid plasma reagin (RPR) test for syphilis. The role of these tests was discussed
intensively at the STI Guideline Development Group meeting and assessed in the modelling
exercise to explore their utility.
Some of these traditional rapid tests are briefly discussed below.
4.1 Role of microscopy in diagnosing STIs and other reproductive
tract infections
The light microscope is used in studying microorganisms, especially for identification purposes.
The light microscope uses visible light to directly illuminate specimens, which appear dark
against a bright background. In most light microscopes, the image is viewed directly through
binocular eyepieces with a magnifying glass and the objective lens located in the revolving
nosepiece to give a total magnification ranging from ×10 to ×1000.
The light microscope has been used with Gram staining to detect intracellular gram-negative
diplococci within polymorphonuclear leukocytes for the presumptive diagnosis of gonorrhoea.
The light microscope is also used to diagnose bacterial vaginosis when Gram-stained vaginal
smears show an abundance of gram-positive and gram-negative cocci with reduced gram-
positive lactobacilli in the vaginal flora. Another area the light microscope has a role is in wet-
mount examination of samples collected from the posterior fornix of the vagina when motile
trichomonads can establish a diagnosis of trichomoniasis.
A fluorescence microscope is a type of light microscope that works on the principle of
fluorescence. Fluorescence can be used to visualize some bacteria and viruses that are not
easily visible by light microscopy following staining by a specific antibody attached to a
fluorochrome. In STI detection, the immunofluorescence can be used to detect T. pallidum, C.
trachomatis and HSV.
Dark-field microscopy uses a special type of light microscope in which the light beam is
split such that the edges of objects in the samples are illuminated so that they appear as
silhouettes against a dark background, thus enabling the sample to be seen without stains. In
STIs, dark-field microscopes have been used for detecting T. pallidum. However, this has to be
performed by well-trained and experienced personnel who can adjust the microscope correctly
and can differentiate T. pallidum from other non-pathogenic treponemes and spiral organisms
commonly present on genital and anal mucous membranes. Further, since spirochaetes other
than treponemes colonize the oral cavity, dark-field microscopy is not recommended for
samples from the mouth.
The microscope should be available in any laboratory licensed to perform moderately complex
tasks, but it is not usually available as a point-of-care test.
Microscopy for STIs provides a simple, rapid and relatively inexpensive test that can be
used near the patient – for example, it can be placed in a procedure room within a primary
health care facility. The skills needed for preparing smears for microscopic examination and
interpretation of the microscopic image require training and a good working knowledge of the
microscope. Further, the microscope should be serviced regularly and should be kept clean and
covered when not in use.
35
4. Diagnostic tests for asymptomatic and symptomatic people with STIs
4.2 Quality-assured laboratory testing with a fully operational
management system
Diagnosing a person with an STI has are serious health implications at the individual and
public health levels, and the best available diagnostic tests should therefore be used. All
laboratory tests performed and the reports produced for patient management must be of high
quality. WHO has developed an implementation tool to assist laboratories in implementing a
quality management system (47). To maintain a high-quality service, laboratories should be
accredited to a suitable national or international body, such as the International Organization
of Standardization. The goal is to achieve compliance with international standard ISO 15189.
Such accreditation involves an external audit of the ability to provide a service of high quality
by declaring a defined standard of practice, which is confirmed by peer review.
Although this does not include assessment of the appropriateness of the molecular tests
chosen for diagnosing STIs, the laboratory is expected to be able to provide evidence of the
assessment of the performance capabilities of the tests before they are incorporated into the
STI services offered.
Such a laboratory will be considered to have quality-assured molecular testing with a fully
operational management system.
In addition, for STI prevention and control, WHO recommends that laboratories aim to offer
tests that minimize the time between the sample is taken and the patient receives the results –
ideally on the same day as the visit. It is further suggested that laboratories set indicators that
reflect the quality of their results with targets for rapid turnaround times.
36
Correct and effective treatment of STIs, ideally given and taken on the same day, at the first
contact between patients and health-care providers, is an important public health measure
in the control of STIs since it endeavours to break the chain of transmission of the infection
without delay.
Countries should establish and use national standardized treatment protocols for STIs.
Standardization ensures that all patients receive appropriate and adequate treatment at all
levels of the health-care service. The protocols can also facilitate the training and supervision
of health-care providers and can help reduce the risk of development of resistance to
antimicrobials. Finally, having a standardized list of antimicrobial agents can also facilitate
procurement of the medicines.
It is anticipated that the recommendations contained in this document will assist countries
to develop standardized flow charts adapted to the local epidemiological situation and
antimicrobial susceptibility data. It is recommended that national guidelines for the effective
management of STIs be developed in close consultation between local STI and public health
experts and laboratorians.
5. RATIONALE FOR STANDARDIZED
TREATMENT RECOMMENDATIONS
37
A flow chart is a diagrammatic map that guides through a series of actions and decisions
needed to solve a problem. All flow charts have the same general features: an entry point,
action, decision and treatment boxes. Each action or decision is enclosed in a box, with one or
two routes leading out of it to another box with another decision or action.
Thus, a health-care provider learning of a problem would turn to the relevant flow chart and
work through the decisions and actions it suggests. Each flow chart would then follow the
following three basic steps:
•	the clinical problem (the presenting symptom) at the top: the entry point;
•	a decision to make, usually by answering “yes” or “no” to a question; and
•	an action to take, with various boxes suggesting treatment, counselling, health education
and condom promotion or patient referral, if necessary.
Although using boxes, circles, diamonds or other such symbols to construct a flow chart
is not strictly necessary, most flow charts are constructed from standard symbols to help
communicate the processes to everyone who uses them. When people see a specific symbol
in a chart, they would therefore understand a specific meaning. Thus, knowing the meaning
of the standard symbols can be helpful in reading, using and creating flow charts. ISO 5807
specifies the standard flow chart symbols for information processing. The commonly used flow
chart symbols are as follows.
A rounded rectangle identifies the beginning or end of a process or origin
and destination of data. This would normally be the patient’s symptoms.
The process symbol: this is a rectangle that designates an activity.
Typically, this would be a step or action that needs to be taken. Within the
rectangle would be a short description of the activity: for example,
“examine the patient”.
The decision symbol is represented as a diamond (rhombus) from which
the process branches into two or more paths. The path taken depends on
the answer to the question appearing within the diamond. Each path is
labelled to correspond to an answer to the question, usually from the
bottom point and right point, one corresponding to yes or true and the
other to no or false. The arrows should always be clearly labelled.
An arrow coming from one symbol and ending at another symbol indicates
that the process passes to the symbol the arrow points to. The line for the
arrow can be solid or dashed. The meaning of the arrow with dashed lines
may differ from one flow chart to another and can be defined in the
legend.
To use a flow chart, one simply starts at the clinical problem box and works through step
by step until one arrives at an exit box at the end of a branch. Along the way there may be
branching arrows from the decision box to action boxes, which should be followed in the
direction of the arrows until the exit box or boxes.
6. IMPLEMENTING THE SYNDROMIC
APPROACH FOR THE MANAGEMENT OF STIs
38
Urethral discharge among men is commonly caused by N. gonorrhoeae and/or C. trachomatis
and/or non-gonococcal and non-chlamydial pathogens, such as M. genitalium and T. vaginalis.
The prevalence of each of these pathogens varies geographically and by population group.
Countries must conduct studies periodically in their settings to determine the most prevalent
and important causes of urethral discharge or urethritis in that setting.
7.1 Clinical presentation – symptoms
Characteristically, men with urethritis (inflammation of the urethra) present with urethral
discharge with or without dysuria (pain on urination). Occasionally, dysuria or itching at the tip
of the urethra may be the only symptoms.
7.2 Examination findings – signs
Most men with urethritis have urethral discharge, which may range in quantity from being scanty
to copious and in character from being clear to purulent. Distinguishing between discharge
caused by gonorrhoea, chlamydia or any other cause of urethritis is not clinically possible.
7.3 Laboratory diagnosis
7.3.1 Molecular detection
NAAT is the current gold standard for detecting C. trachomatis and N. gonorrhoeae among
men and women. NAAT also performs well for pharyngeal and anorectal samples for C.
trachomatis and N. gonorrhoeae. For anorectal samples among men who have sex with men,
chlamydia genovar testing for lymphogranuloma venereum should be done to guide the
appropriate treatment regimen for lymphogranuloma venereum (48).
7.3.1.1 Specimens for N. gonorrhoeae and C. trachomatis for molecular
assays
A first-catch urine or a urethral swab can be used for C. trachomatis and N. gonorrhoeae. NAAT
for N. gonorrhoeae from anorectal and pharyngeal samples is also good, but there is potential
for cross-reactivity with commensal Neisseria spp., especially in the throat.
7.3.1.2 Specimens for M. genitalium
M. genitalium causes urethritis. NAAT offers the best method for detecting M. genitalium from
a first-catch urine in men. M. genitalium testing is not yet widely available.
7. URETHRAL DISCHARGE SYNDROME
39
7. Urethral discharge syndrome
7.3.1.3 Specimens for T. vaginalis
NAAT has the highest sensitivity of all diagnostic methods for detecting T. vaginalis. Urine can
be used for some assays, but residual genital swab samples used for diagnosing chlamydia and
gonorrhoea using NAAT are also good enough for detecting T. vaginalis nucleic acids.
7.3.2 Culture methods
Culture of N. gonorrhoeae is still the standard method for performing antimicrobial
susceptibility testing. However, this organism is not that easy to grow in the laboratory,
requiring special training and a special culture medium. For this reason, culture of
N. gonorrhoeae is not routinely performed as part of managing people with gonococcal
infection in resource-limited settings.
Culture of T. vaginalis was the cornerstone for detecting T. vaginalis before the advent of point-
of-care antigen tests and NAAT. Although a culture medium is commercially available, once
inoculated into the medium, cultures from men have to be incubated for a full five days while
being examined daily using a microscope before being determined to be negative. Further,
multiple sites, including semen, urine and urethral swabs, need to be examined before a
definitive negative result can be certain. Routine culture methods for detecting T. vaginalis
are no longer widely performed.
7.3.3 Microscopy
N. gonorrhoeae can be identified by light microscopy of Gram-stained samples and a
presumptive diagnosis of gonorrhoea made if gram-negative diplococci are observed
intracellularly in polymorphonuclear leukocytes, best seen when there is a urethral discharge.
If carried out by an experienced person, a negative gram stain for intracellular diplococci, in the
context of urethral discharge in a man, can be presumed to suggest non-gonococcal urethritis.
Microscopy of methylene blue stain of a male urethral sample is an acceptable method for the
presumptive diagnosis of gonorrhoea, but it does not allow for the differentiation of gram-
negative cocci.
40
Guidelines for the management of symptomatic sexually transmitted infections
7.4 Recommendations for the management of urethral
discharge
For people with symptom of urethral discharge from the
penis, management is recommended to be based on the
results of quality-assured molecular assays. However, in
settings with limited or no molecular tests or laboratory
capacity, WHO recommends syndromic treatment to ensure
treatment on the same day of the visit.
(Strong
recommendation;
moderate-
certainty evidence)
Good practice includes:
•	taking a medical and sexual history and assessing the risk of
STIs;
•	performing a physical examination of the genital and anal areas;
and
•	offering HIV and syphilis testing and other preventive services as
recommended in other guidelines.
Good practice
statement
Settings with quality-assured molecular testing in a laboratory with
a fully operational quality management system and results available
on the same day of the visit
WHO recommends the following.
1.	 Perform molecular assays such as nucleic-acid amplification
testing (NAAT) to confirm or exclude Neisseria gonorrhoeae and
Chlamydia trachomatis.
2.	 Treat according to the test results on the same day. If urethral
discharge is present but tests are negative, treat for non-
gonococcal and non-chlamydial urethritis (such as Mycoplasma
genitalium or Trichomonas vaginalis).
3.	 When treatment based on molecular assays is not feasible
on the same day of the visit, WHO recommends syndromic
treatment of infection with N. gonorrhoeae and C. trachomatis
and using the test results to support managing the partner when
tests are available.
4.	Treat people with recurrent or persistent urethral discharge
based on a repeat molecular assay (such as NAAT) after 21
days, testing for N. gonorrhoeae, C. trachomatis as well as
M. genitalium and T. vaginalis and testing for antimicrobial-
resistant N. gonorrhoeae.
(Strong
recommendation;
moderate-
certainty
evidence)
41
7. Urethral discharge syndrome
Settings in which same-day treatment is not feasible with molecular
testing or with limited or no molecular testing
WHO suggests the following.
1.	 	Treat people who have urethral discharge confirmed on
examination for N. gonorrhoeae and C. trachomatis to ensure
same-day treatment.
2.	 Treat people with recurrent or persistent urethral discharge for
treatment failure based on WHO guidelines and review.
(Conditional
recommendation;
low-certainty
evidence)
Good practice includes:
•	if symptoms persist at review, checking partner notification and
treatment history; and
•	for people with recurrent or persistent urethral discharge,
referring people to a centre with laboratory capacity to diagnose
N. gonorrhoeae, C. trachomatis, M. genitalium and T. vaginalis
and to test for antimicrobial-resistant N. gonorrhoeae and M.
genitalium.
Good practice
statement
Fig. 2. Flow chart for the management of urethral discharge from the penis
NG, N.gonorrhoeae; CT, C. trachomatis.
* If molecular assay was performed and results were not available on same day, revise the syndromic treatment initially provided
according to the test results when available
# If test is negative but urethral discharge is present, treat for non-gonococcal/non-chlamydial urethritis (such as M. genitalium,
T. vaginalis or herpes simplex virus)
Take medical and sexual history
and assess risk for STIs
Physical and genital examination
See patient in 1 week to see if symptoms persist or recur or contact
sooner for treatment based on results of molecular assay
Treat based on test results
TREAT for NG and CT
Offer HIV and syphilis testing and other preventive services
Person with symptom of urethral discharge from penis
Perform test
Resources and capacity for molecular assays
Limited laboratory capacity
Are results available
on same day?
Is test positive
for NG/CT?
Urethral discharge
present?
Yes
Yes
No
No
No*
Yes
42
Guidelines for the management of symptomatic sexually transmitted infections
No
Fig. 3. Flow chart for men with persistent or recurrent urethral discharge
This flow chart assumes that the patient has received and taken effective therapy for
gonorrhoea and chlamydia before this consultation.
Offer HIV and syphilis testing and other preventive services
Take medical and sexual
history and examine
Person with symptom of recurrent or persistent
urethral discharge following treatment
Discharge present?
Yes
Yes
Yes
•	Test 21 days after initial treatment
•	Consider M. genitalium and T. vaginalis
•	Collect urethral specimen for microscopy,
culture and sensitivity testing, if possible
•	Treat based on WHO NG treatment failure
guidelines and on antimicrobial resistance
for NG or MG
Treat for NG/CT according to
WHO treatment failure
guidelines
Refer to centre with
laboratory capacity to
test for NG/CT or MG and
antimicrobial resistance
Retreat for NG/CT
Resources
and capacity for
molecular assays
Limited
laboratory
capacity
No
Are the following likely?
•	Reinfection or
•	Poor treatment compliance
Discharge still present
on review?
NG, N.gonorrhoeae; CT, C. trachomatis; MG, M. genitalium.
43
7. Urethral discharge syndrome
7.4.1 Evidence summary (Annex 3)
A systematic review of the accuracy of syndromic approaches for urethral discharge was
conducted, including history, risk assessment, examination and microscopy (supplementary
material: systematic review urethral discharge). Six studies were found for assessing the
accuracy of syndromic management to detect N. gonorrhoeae and C. trachomatis, but
the pooled sensitivity and specificity of the approaches did not improve as expected
when adding microscopy (low-certainty evidence). In addition, studies show that there
is variability in the implementation of the syndromic approaches based on symptoms or
laboratory testing (49). Instead, the WHO Guideline Development Group considered that,
when available, performing molecular assay tests for N. gonorrhoeae, C. trachomatis, T.
vaginalis and/or M. genitalium and basing treatment on these results leads to treating the
most people correctly. In the systematic review, the median prevalence of N. gonorrhoeae
and/or C. trachomatis was 69% in men with urethral discharge. In a population with 60%
prevalence of N. gonorrhoeae and C. trachomatis among those with urethral discharge,
if molecular assays are not available, treating everyone for N. gonorrhoeae and C.
trachomatis would mean 40% of them would be unnecessarily treated. The Guideline
Development Group agreed that this proportion is acceptable and even higher proportions
in settings with lower prevalence, because treating everyone would ensure that people
infected with N. gonorrhoeae and C. trachomatis are treated, thereby reducing the chance
of complications and further transmission. The Guideline Development Group also agreed
that simple syndromic treatment based on the presence of urethral discharge would likely
improve adherence to the approach and costs a minimal amount more than using history
and/or risk assessment with or without examination (but with no missed cases).
7.5 Treatment recommendations for urethral discharge
Based on the recommendations in subsection 7.4, syndromic treatment for urethral discharge
combines treatment for gonococcal and chlamydial infections. Other modifications can be made
based on the availability of molecular diagnostic tests. Table 3 gives first-line and effective
substitutes for treating people with urethral discharge syndrome.
Managing people with recurrent or persistent urethral discharge will require excluding
reinfection by taking a thorough sexual history. When that has been done, additional
treatment for M. genitalium and T. vaginalis may be considered. WHO guidelines on
Neisseria gonorrhoeae (24) give guidance on how to approach apparent treatment failures
among people with gonococcal infections.
44
Guidelines for the management of symptomatic sexually transmitted infections
Table 3. Recommended treatment options for urethral discharge syndromea
•	 Therapy for uncomplicated Neisseria gonorrhoeae (24)
Plus
•	 Therapy for Chlamydia trachomatis (25)
Infections
covered
First-line options
Effective substitutes
In settings in which local antimicrobial resistance data are not available, the WHO STI guideline suggests dual therapy
for gonorrhoea.
N. gonorrhoeaea
Ceftriaxone 250 mg, intramuscularly, single
dose
Plus
Azithromycin 1 gram, orally, single dose
Cefixime 400 mg, orally, single dose
Plus
Azithromycin 1 gram, orally, single dose
C. trachomatis
Doxycycline 100 mg, orally, twice daily for
seven days
(to be given only if gonorrhoea therapy did not
include azithromycin)
Azithromycin 1 gram, orally, single dose
or
Erythromycin 500 mg, orally, 4 times a day
for 7 days
or
Ofloxacin 200–400 mg, orally, twice a day
for 7 days.
(to be given only if gonorrhoea therapy did not
include azithromycin)
In settings in which local antimicrobial resistance data reliably confirm the susceptibility of N. gonorrhoeae to the
antimicrobial agent, singe therapy may be given.
N. gonorrhoeae
Ceftriaxone 250 mg, intramuscularly, single
dose
Cefixime 400 mg, orally, single dose
or
Spectinomycin 2 grams, intramuscularly,
single dose (availability makes this antibiotic
impractical)
Additional therapeutic options for recurrent or persistent infections
T. vaginalis
Metronidazole 2 grams, orally, single doses
Metronidazole 400 or 500 mg, twice daily
for 7 days
M. genitalium
Azithromycin 500 mg, orally on day 1, 250
mg daily on days 2–5
aBecause of increasing antimicrobial resistance to azithromycin in N. gonorrhoeae and M. genitalium and reduced susceptibility of
N. gonorrhoeae to cephalosporins, WHO is in the process of revising current treatment recommendations and dosages.
45
Vulvovaginal symptoms are one of the commonest reasons for women attending a health
facility. The symptoms include a vaginal discharge perceived by the woman to be abnormal,
vulval irritation or itching. Other conditions may include vulvovaginal growths, such as warts
and cancer, especially of the cervix – these are not discussed in these guidelines.
The three most common causes of vaginal discharge are bacterial vaginosis and infection with
T. vaginalis and C. albicans. Among postpubertal women, N. gonorrhoeae and C. trachomatis
infect the endocervix rather than the vagina, and they therefore may not present with vaginal
discharge. These infections may be present without any clinically evident abnormality of
the cervical os. If an abnormality is present at the cervical os because of infection with C.
trachomatis or N. gonorrhoeae, it would be a mucus discharge or a purulent discharge (mucopus)
or inflammation and friability of the cervical os. In the context of STIs, it should therefore be
emphasized that vaginal discharge more reliably indicates vaginal infections but poorly predicts
cervical infection caused by N. gonorrhoeae and/or C. trachomatis. The challenge for a health-
care provider consulting a woman with vaginal discharge is to determine the cause of the
discharge when a variety of infectious and non-infectious causes may be at play.
The summary of the systemic review and the recommendations given in this section offer
guidance on how to manage people presenting with symptoms of abnormal vaginal discharge.
The commonest causes of vaginal discharge are briefly discussed below.
8.1 T. vaginalis
T. vaginalis is a sexually transmitted protozoan that specifically infects women’s vagina, urethra
and paraurethral glands. Although many women are asymptomatic, more than 50% of women
with T. vaginalis infection have vaginal discharge.
8.1.1 Clinical presentation – symptoms
Among symptomatic women, infection with T. vaginalis presents with an abnormal vaginal
discharge as perceived by the woman. About 50% of symptomatic women report vulval itching.
The discharge may be described as yellow and may appear purulent.
8.1.2 Examination findings – signs
On examination, vulval erythema and oedema may be noted.
On speculum examination, a discharge of variable colour can be seen in the vagina –
classically described as yellow or greenish and may be frothy. The vaginal walls may be
erythematous. The cervix may have punctate haemorrhages, giving rise to what has been
referred to as “strawberry cervix”. Although this finding is uncommon, it is highly indicative
of trichomoniasis.
8. VAGINAL DISCHARGE SYNDROME
46
Guidelines for the management of symptomatic sexually transmitted infections
8.1.3 Molecular testing
NAAT has the highest sensitivity of all diagnostic methods to detect T. vaginalis. Vaginal swabs
are the samples of choice, but endocervical samples and urine can be used for some assays.
Additionally, residual genital samples used for diagnosing chlamydia and gonorrhoea using
NAAT are also good enough for detecting T. vaginalis nucleic acids. NAAT is, however, not
currently widely available as rapid point-of-care tests. However, when resources permit, such
tests can be incorporated strategically to use as near-patient rapid point-of-care testing in
managing people with STIs.
8.1.4 Microscopy
T. vaginalis has historically been diagnosed by performing wet mount microscopy. Although
it is not the gold standard technique for diagnosing trichomoniasis, a wet mount is frequently
used because it is quick, inexpensive and easy to perform. However, to have a good chance of
successfully identifying the motile trichomonads, the slide should be read within 10 minutes
of collection since trichomonads quickly lose their motility (50). Non-motile cells cannot be
diagnosed as trichomonads.
8.1.5 Culture methods
Culture of T. vaginalis, which has a higher sensitivity than the wet mount microscopic
examination, was the cornerstone for detecting T. vaginalis before the advent of point-of-
care antigen tests and NAAT. Although a culture medium is commercially available, cultures
from women with trichomoniasis are usually positive in the first three days of inoculation, but
they have to be incubated for up to seven days to rule out infection. Routine culture methods
detecting T. vaginalis are no longer widely performed.
8.2 Candidiasis
Vulvovaginal candidiasis is caused by C. albicans in about 90% of cases. The non-albicans
species cause the rest of vulvovaginal candidiasis – C. glabrata in about 8% of cases, and the
other non-albicans species, such as C. tropicalis, C. krusei and C. parapsilosis cause most of the
remainder (51). Although men can be colonized with Candida species and the male sex partners
of women with candidiasis are transiently colonized, candida balanitis and balanoposthitis
among men are not recognized as STIs (52). Candida yeasts may be detected in 20–30% of
asymptomatic nonpregnant women of childbearing age (53). The detection of candida yeasts
among asymptomatic women therefore does not necessarily require treatment.
8.2.1 Clinical presentation – symptoms
Candidiasis presents with pruritus (itching) or a burning sensation of the vulva and vaginal
soreness or irritation. Other clinical manifestations include pain during sexual intercourse
(dyspareunia) and dysuria. If there is discharge, it characteristically is curdy, white or creamy
and thick. The discharge is not always curd-like (sometimes described as cottage-cheese-like in
character) but can vary from watery to homogeneously thick.
47
8. Vaginal discharge syndrome
8.2.2 Examination findings – signs
On examination, the vulva may be erythematous and excoriated. The vulva and the labia may
be swollen. Some pimples with pus (pustulopapular) lesions peripheral to the erythematous
area of the vulva may be present.
Speculum examination shows the vaginal wall to be erythematous, and an adherent discharge
may be seen, either curd-like or homogeneously white. The cervix looks normal.
8.2.3 Microscopy
Vaginal pH is normally between 4 and 4.5 among most women with candidiasis. A Gram stain
of vaginal secretions from the walls of the vagina demonstrates gram-positive Candida species.
A 10% potassium hydroxide preparation is also useful in identifying germinated yeasts.
8.2.4 Culture methods
Candida culture on solid media is the most sensitive diagnostic test for candidiasis but does
not offer same-day treatment. The results may take up to three days to confirm the growth of
fungal colonies.
8.3 Bacterial vaginosis
Bacterial vaginosis is the most common cause of vaginal discharge among women of
childbearing age. It is a polymicrobial disorder of the vaginal microbiome. The condition is
characterized by low concentrations or an absence of lactobacilli and a florid presence of
anaerobic flora (54).
Bacterial vaginosis is not a sexually transmitted condition, but it has been linked to several
adverse outcomes, including adverse outcomes of pregnancy and an increased risk of STIs,
including HIV, pelvic inflammatory disease and tubal factor infertility (55,56).
8.3.1 Clinical presentation – symptoms
About 90% of symptomatic women have a white vaginal discharge, which can be seen on the
vulva, and an abnormal vaginal odour (52).
8.3.2 Examination findings – signs
On external visual examination and digital examination of the vagina, the thin, white,
homogenous discharge may be observed externally on the posterior fourchette of the vulva or
the labia. If speculum examination is feasible, the homogeneous discharge may be observed to
be adherent to the vaginal wall, and the cervix is usually normal in appearance.
8.3.3 Laboratory diagnosis
The vaginal pH is greater than 4.5, and an amine odour can be sensed spontaneously or after
addition of a drop of 10% potassium hydroxide to vaginal fluid on a slide (KOH test or Whiff test).
48
Guidelines for the management of symptomatic sexually transmitted infections
However, examining the woman during menses, within a day of sexual intercourse, after
recent douching and when taking antimicrobial agents can affect the clinical and laboratory
assessments of a woman with bacterial vaginosis. The pH paper may give a wrong reading if it
samples the water used to lubricate the speculum or if it samples cervical secretions, which are
relatively alkaline. The amine smell, described as smelling like “dead fish”, can be subjective,
since some people cannot discern the smell.
8.3.3.1 Microscopy
If the microscope is available at the point of care, a wet-mount microscopic test for clue cells can
be done. Clue cells are vaginal epithelial squamous cells coated with coccobacilli with absence of
rods of lactobacilli. When visualized, clue cells predict bacterial vaginosis. Identifying clue cells
requires adequate training and good skills and good knowledge of the microscope.
Microscopic examination of a Gram-stained vaginal smear collected with a swab from the
vagina reveals large numbers of gram-positive and gram-negative cocci with reduced or absent
lactobacilli (gram-positive bacilli).
8.4 Cervical infection – gonococcal and/or chlamydial cervicitis
N. gonorrhoeae and C. trachomatis infections among postpubertal women infect the
endocervix rather than the vagina and can thus cause a cervical discharge, which may manifest
as vaginal discharge. However, these two pathogens are less commonly associated with vaginal
discharge.
8.4.1 Risk factors for STI-related cervical infections
Several demographic and behavioural factors have also been frequently associated with
cervical infections and have been established as risk factors for STIs. Some of those that have
been found to predict cervical infection in the presence of abnormal vaginal discharge in some
settings are: being younger than 21 years (25 years in some places); having more than one sex
partner in the previous three months; having a new partner in the previous three months; and
having a current partner with an STI (57). Such risk factors are, however, usually specific to the
population group for which they have been identified and validated and cannot be extrapolated
to other populations or to other locations. Most researchers have suggested that obtaining
more than one demographic risk factor from any particular person is important but that clinical
signs such as cervical erosion can be valid as a single factor.
8.4.2 Clinical presentation – symptoms
At least 50% of women with gonococcal infection of the cervix are asymptomatic. Women with
symptoms may have vaginal discharge, abnormal vaginal bleeding or dysuria. Most women
with chlamydial cervical infection are asymptomatic. The ones who may be symptomatic have
vaginal discharge, dyspareunia and dysuria. Several women may have lower abdominal pain
because of ascending infection, causing pelvic inflammatory disease.
49
8. Vaginal discharge syndrome
8.4.3 Examination findings – signs
Speculum examination may reveal a normal-looking cervix in the presence of endocervical
infection. For those with abnormalities, the cervix may be erythematous or severely eroded and
associated with a muco-purulent cervical discharge. The cervix may be friable and bleed easily
on contact.
8.4.4 Microscopy
Gram-stained smears from the cervix are considered positive for the presumptive diagnosis
of gonorrhoea in women if intracellular gram-negative diplococci are observed in
polymorphonuclear leukocytes. Gram stain of urethral samples among women has low yield
and may not be cost-effective (58).
8.4.5 Molecular detection
Molecular testing has greatly improved the detection of C. trachomatis and N. gonorrhoeae
among both symptomatic and asymptomatic women and has become the recommended
gold standard technology to diagnose and screen populations for C. trachomatis and
N. gonorrhoeae. Among women, a vulvovaginal specimen, which may be self-collected, can
be used for testing for these infections. An endocervical swab can also be an alternative but
requires a speculum. First-catch urine is another option, but the sensitivity and specificity tend
to be lower in women.
8.4.6 Culture methods
Processing C. trachomatis for culture requires highly experienced laboratories and technicians
and is complex, laborious and time-consuming to be of economic value. It is rarely performed
in middle- or high-income countries nowadays except for special purposes (59).
Culture for N. gonorrhoeae requires a special culture medium with nutrient supplementation
for the organism to grow. Cervical and anorectal specimens can be used. The process is still
necessary to undertake antimicrobial susceptibility testing to guide therapy, especially in cases
of infection with N. gonorrhoeae isolates resistant to standard recommended therapies.
50
Guidelines for the management of symptomatic sexually transmitted infections
8.5 Recommendations for the management of vaginal
discharge
For people with symptom of vaginal discharge, WHO recommends
treatment for N. gonorrhoeae and/or C. trachomatis and/or
T. vaginalis on the same visit. WHO suggests treatment based on
the results of quality-assured molecular assays for N. gonorrhoeae
and/or C. trachomatis and/or T. vaginalis. In settings in which
treatment based on the results of molecular assay in the same visit
is not feasible or that have limited or no molecular testing, WHO
suggests treatment based on testing with quality-assured rapid
point-of-care tests or on syndromic treatment.
(Strong
recommendation;
moderate-
certainty evidence
For people with symptom of vaginal discharge, good practice
includes:
•	taking a medical and sexual history and assessing the risk of
STIs;
•	performing a physical examination, including abdominal and
pelvic examination, to assess for pelvic inflammatory disease,
surgical conditions or pregnancy and external vulvovaginal
examination to visualize any lesions, overt genital discharge or
vulval erythema and excoriations;
•	bimanual digital examination of the vagina (1) to assess for
cervical motion tenderness or pain with palpation of the pelvic
area to exclude pelvic inflammatory disease; and (2) to assess for
the presence of vaginal discharge and the colour and consistency
of the discharge on the glove; and
•	offering HIV and syphilis testing and other preventive services as
recommended in other guidelines.
Good practice
statement
Settings in which treatment is based on quality-assured molecular
assays in a laboratory with a fully operational quality management
system and results available on the same day of the visit
1.	 WHO recommends treating N. gonorrhoeae and/or
C. trachomatis and/or T. vaginalis based on the results of
quality-assured molecular assays on a self-collected, or clinician-
collected, vaginal swab or on a urine specimen (Algorithm 1 ).
2.	 WHO suggests treating for bacterial vaginosis if vaginal
discharge is present (for example, tenacious or thin) or based on
the results of microscopy, if available.
3.	 WHO suggests treating for candidiasis, where indicated by type
of discharge (such as curd-like with vaginal itching) or by the
results of microscopy, if available.
(Strong
recommendation;
moderate-
certainty
evidence)
51
8. Vaginal discharge syndrome
Settings in which same-day treatment is not feasible with molecular
testing or with limited or no molecular testing
1.	 WHO suggests treating based on a quality-assured rapid test
with a minimum sensitivity of 80% and specificity of 90%, if
available, to confirm or exclude infection with N. gonorrhoeae
and C. trachomatis (Algorithm 2 ).
2.	 If the availability of a low-cost rapid test or molecular assay
is limited, WHO suggests performing a speculum examination
and treating for N. gonorrhoeae and C. trachomatis if
there is evidence of cervicitis and performing a low-cost
rapid test or molecular assay for people with a negative
speculum examination who are at high risk of infection with
N. gonorrhoeae and C. trachomatis and treating based on the
test results (Algorithm 3 a).
3.	 If a rapid test is not available, WHO suggests treating people
who have signs of cervicitis on speculum examination for
infection with N. gonorrhoeae and C. trachomatis
(Algorithm 3 ).
4.	If a rapid test is not available and a speculum examination
is not feasible or acceptable, WHO suggests treating people
for N. gonorrhoeae and C. trachomatis, all people at high risk
of STIs and all people who have vaginal discharge on genital
examination (Algorithm 4 ).
5.	 WHO suggests treating people for bacterial vaginosis and T.
vaginalis if vaginal discharge is present or based on the results
of microscopy, if available.
6.	WHO suggests treating people for candidiasis, where indicated
by type of discharge (such as curd-like with vaginal itching) or
by the results of microscopy, if available.
(Conditional
recommendation;
low-certainty
evidence)
Good practice includes the following.
•	For people with recurrent or persistent vaginal discharge, good
practice includes referring to a centre with laboratory capacity
to diagnose infection with N. gonorrhoeae, C. trachomatis,
M. genitalium and T. vaginalis and bacterial vaginosis and to test
for antimicrobial-resistant N. gonorrhoeae and M. genitalium (if
there is a test) or for a specialist’s assessment (STI expert and
physician or a gynaecologist), when no such testing is available
in primary health care centres.
Good practice
statement
52
Guidelines for the management of symptomatic sexually transmitted infections
Fig. 4 offers programme managers guidance on the most applicable approaches to manage
people presenting with vaginal discharge. It can be used to select sites or health facilities
that can implement an option that has the appropriate diagnostic capacity and expertise. For
example, a rural health centre with only basic commodities could follow one option, whereas a
referral centre could implement a different option.
Fig. 4. Flow chart for programme managers to determine which
management options to implement for vaginal discharge
No
No
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Option A
•	perform quality assured molecular tests for
N. gonorrhoeae and C. trachomatis, and
T. vaginalis, and treat based on test results;
•	treat for bacterial vaginosis (and T. vaginalis
if not tested) if vaginal discharge present or
based on results of microscopy
•	treat for candidiasis according to type of
discharge or if confirmed by microscopy
Option B
•	provide treatment based on Option C, D or E
•	perform quality assured molecular tests for N. gonorrhoeae and C. trachomatis,
and T. vaginalis if available, and revise treatment based on results when available
Option C
•	treat for N. gonorrhoeae and C. trachomatis based
on positive results of rapid point of care test;
•	treat for bacterial vaginosis and T. vaginalis if vaginal
discharge present or based on results of microscopy
•	treat for candidiasis according to type of discharge
or if confirmed by microscopy
•	refer people with recurrent or persistent vaginal
discharge to a centre with molecular testing
Option E
•	treat for N. gonorrhoeae and C. trachomatis in people
who are at high risk;
•	treat people for N. gonorrhoeae and C. trachomatis who
have confirmed vaginal discharge;
•	treat for bacterial vaginosis and T. vaginalis if vaginal
discharge present or based on results of microscopy;
•	treat for candidiasis according to type of discharge or if
confirmed by microscopy;
•	refer people with recurrent or persistent vaginal
discharge to a centre with laboratory capacity
Option D
•	treat for N. gonorrhoeae and C. trachomatis based
on evidence of cervicitis on speculum examination;
•	for people who are negative on speculum
examination do not treat, or if available in limited
capacity perform a low-cost rapid point of care test
or molecular assay in people that are at high risk for
N. gonorrhoeae and C. trachomatis and treat based
on test results;
•	treat for bacterial vaginosis and T. vaginalis if vaginal
discharge present or based on results of microscopy
•	treat for candidiasis according to type of discharge
or if confirmed by microscopy;
•	refer people with recurrent or persistent vaginal
discharge to a centre with laboratory capacity, if not
available in current setting
Do you have quality assured
molecular tests for N.gonorrhoeae,
C.trachomatis and/or T. vaginalis
available for all patients?
Do you have capacity to
perform speculum examinations
for all patients?
Do you have low cost rapid
point of care tests (minimum
sensitivity/specificity of 80%/90%)
available for all patients?
Are results
available on
same visit?
53
8. Vaginal discharge syndrome
Fig. 5 is a proposed flow chart for health-care providers to follow in the process of managing
people presenting with vaginal discharge. This flow chart can be adopted as it is or adapted to
respond to the situation at the country level.
Fig. 5. Flow chart for health-care providers to manage vaginal discharge
according to local availability of resources and preferences
1
Molecular assays
for NG, CT or TV
available for all
patients
NG, N. gonorrhoeae; CT, Chlamydia trachomatis; TV, Trichomonas vaginalis; BV, bacterial vaginosis.
aIf molecular assay was performed and results were not available on same day, revise the syndromic treatment initially provided
according to the test results when available
bperform rapid point of care test or molecular assay if available to confirm NG/CT and treat if positive; if negative do not treat and
ask woman to return if symptoms recur
cif woman complains of recurrent or persistent discharge refer to a centre with laboratory capacity
Take medical and sexual history to assess
for likely exposure to STIs
Perform clinical exam and bimanual
digital exam of the vagina
Treat for BV and TV if abnormal vaginal discharge present or according to microscopy examination
or molecular assay (for TV); treat for candidiasis if curd-like discharge and/or vaginal itchiness
Treat
NG+CT
Treat NG
and/or CT
based on
test result
Treat NG
and/or CT
based on
test result
Offer HIV testing and syphilis testing, and other preventive services
Person with symptom of vaginal discharge
Conduct test
Conduct test
Perform speculum exam
Vaginal discharge
present on genital
exam
Results available
same day?
Test
positive?
Test
positive?
Woman at high
risk for STI
Evidence of
cervicitis
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Noa
Refer if other conditions identified
or consult other algorithms based
on other signs and symptoms
Yes
No
Plus
Plusc
Noc
Nob,c
Plusc
2
Low cost rapid point of care
test for NG/CT available for all
patients (molecular assays
not available)
3
Speculum available and
acceptable (molecular assays
or rapid point of care tests
not available or for some)
4
Speculum NOT
available or NOT
acceptable (tests
not available)
54
Guidelines for the management of symptomatic sexually transmitted infections
8.6.1 Evidence summary (Annex 4)
Using a model, we compared the benefits, harm and costs of different combinations
of using a risk assessment, speculum examination, microscopy, rapid point-of-care
test and/or molecular assay test or treating none or all people who have vaginal
discharge (supplementary materials – description of the modelling of vaginal discharge).
We modelled two scenarios in which the prevalence of N. gonorrhoeae and/or
C. trachomatis among people with vaginal discharge is low (5%) and high (20%) and
applied different levels of antimicrobial resistance. We assumed same-day treatment
for the different combinations of assessment and calculated the number of people
with pelvic inflammatory disease as a critical harm and accounted for loss to follow-up
and transmission. The evidence for the effects of the different strategies is moderate-
certainty evidence because of the risk of bias of the included studies for calculating
sensitivity and specificity.
In the model, we assumed that the costs of treatment for bacterial vaginosis or
T. vaginalis is about US$ 0.10, and we assumed that everyone with confirmed vaginal
discharge would be treated for bacterial vaginosis and T. vaginalis. These figures are
based on a review of the accuracy of risk assessment, speculum examination and/or
laboratory testing for bacterial vaginosis and T. vaginalis (supplemental materials –
systematic review vaginal discharge).
Although microscopy was accurate, with no false-positive treatments and less than
1% of cases missed, the costs of implementing microscopy in settings that currently
do not have facilities outweighs the costs of treating everyone with confirmed vaginal
discharge for bacterial vaginosis and T. vaginalis and the harm to people unnecessarily
treated (about 40% of the people). We considered the effects of screening for bacterial
vaginosis and T. vaginalis using pH testing compared with confirmed vaginal discharge
and found that the differences in people missed and people treated unnecessarily were
negligible and the costs and harm of treatment or missing treatment are relatively low.
When available, performing molecular tests for N. gonorrhoeae, C. trachomatis or
T. vaginalis and treating on the same day based on the results leads to the most people
treated correctly. However, when the results of the tests are not available on the same
day of the visit, delay in treatment may lead to complications, transmission of infections
and loss to treatment. Therefore, treatment could be determined based on signs and/or
symptoms or on rapid diagnostic tests.
•	Using a low-cost rapid point-of-care test with 80% sensitivity and 90% specificity
will lead to fewer missed and falsely treated people compared with other syndromic
approaches or with no treatment. Since there is a reduction in missed cases, the
number of people who progress to pelvic inflammatory disease (and consequently to
poor fertility and other negative reproductive health outcomes for some people) may
be reduced by 70%, resulting in 4 per 1000 people experiencing pelvic inflammatory
disease in settings in which the prevalence of N. gonorrhoeae and C. trachomatis
is low versus 15 people per 1000 in settings in which it is high compared with no
treatment. Since the accuracy of the test increases towards 95% sensitivity and
98% specificity, there are even greater reductions in missed cases and unnecessary
treatments, but costs will increase. Using diagnostic tests with higher sensitivity and
specificity may also lead to greater understanding of the prevalence of STIs in the
community, enhanced sex partner tracing and improved overall quality of care.
55
8. Vaginal discharge syndrome
We also modelled strategies in which molecular assays or rapid point-of-care tests are
not widely available. The following observations were made.
•	Performing a speculum examination and treating people with cervicitis and then
microscopy for people who were negative on speculum examination may also lead to
fewer missed cases and falsely treated people than using a rapid point-of-care test
(at a minimum of 80% sensitivity and 90% specificity) for everyone. Alternatively, if a
rapid point-of-care test is used for the people with a negative speculum examination,
there would be even fewer missed cases and falsely treated people.
•	Treating based only on the results of a speculum examination will still result in pelvic
inflammatory disease cases and costs similar to a rapid point-of-care test, although
the number of people treated unnecessarily would be slightly higher when using the
speculum.
However, performing a speculum examination on everyone with vaginal discharge may
not be feasible in some settings.
•	Thus, when speculum examination is not feasible, the costs of an approach in which
everyone at high risk (including with risk factors in high-prevalence settings) and/or
people with confirmed vaginal discharge are treated may be higher than strategies
with rapid point-of-care tests or speculum examination, but there are large beneficial
reductions in the number of pelvic inflammatory disease cases. Compared with
treating everyone, fewer people are unnecessarily treated.
8.6 Treatment options for vaginal discharge
Table 4 lists the options for the respective medicines to cover vaginal infections. If a decision
was reached to include treatment for N. gonorrhoeae and/or C. trachomatis, Table 5 lists the
options for the recommended medicines.
Bacterial vaginosis and T. vaginalis may be treated simultaneously with the same medicine,
metronidazole. Similarly, in the treatment of cervicitis, some medicines, such as doxycycline
and azithromycin, can simultaneously treat C. trachomatis and M. genitalium.
56
Guidelines for the management of symptomatic sexually transmitted infections
Table 4. Treatment options for vaginal infections
•	 Therapy for bacterial vaginosis and trichomoniasis
Plus
•	 Therapy for yeast infection if curd-like white discharge, vulvovaginal redness and itching are present
Infections
covered
First-line options
Effective substitutes
Note: In pregnancy,
metronidazole should,
ideally, be avoided in the
first trimester
Bacterial vaginosis
Metronidazole
400 mg or 500 mg, orally,
twice daily for 7 days
Clindamycin 300 mg, orally,
twice daily for 7 days
or
Metronidazole 2 grams,
orally, single dose
Metronidazole 200 mg or
250 mg, orally, 3 times a day
for 7 days
or
Metronidazole gel 0.75%,
one full applicator (5 grams)
intravaginally, twice a day for
7 days
or
Clindamycin 300 mg, orally,
twice daily for 7 days
T. vaginalis
Metronidazole 2 grams,
orally, in a single dose
or
Metronidazole
400 mg or 500 mg, orally,
twice daily for 7 days
Tinidazole 2 grams orally,
single dose
or
Tinidazole 500 mg orally,
twice daily for 5 days
Metronidazole 200 mg or
250 mg, orally, 3 times a day
for 7 days
or
Metronidazole gel 0.75%,
one full applicator (5 grams)
intravaginally, twice a day for
7 days
C. albicans
(yeast infection)
Miconazole vaginal
pessaries, 200 mg inserted at
night for 3 nights
or
Clotrimazole vaginal tablet,
100 mg, inserted at night for
7 nights
Fluconazole 150 mg (or
200mg), orally, single dose
OR
Nystatin, 200,000-unit
vaginal tablet, inserted at
night for 7 nights
Miconazole 200 mg vaginal
pessaries inserted once daily
for 3 days
or
Clotrimazole vaginal tablet
100 mg inserted at night for
7 days
or
Nystatin pessaries 200,000
units, inserted at night for 7
nights
People taking metronidazole should be cautioned to avoid alcohol. Use of metronidazole in the first trimester of pregnancy is not
recommended unless the benefits outweigh the potential hazards.
57
8. Vaginal discharge syndrome
Table 5. Treatment options for cervical infectiona
•	 Therapy for uncomplicated N. gonorrhoeae (24)
Plus
•	 Therapy for C. trachomatis (25)
Infections
covered
First-line options
Effective substitutes
Options for pregnant
women or during
breastfeeding
In settings in which local antimicrobial resistance data are not available, the WHO STI guidelines suggest dual therapy
for gonorrhoea.
N. gonorrhoeaea
Ceftriaxone 250 mg,
intramuscularly, single dose
plus
Azithromycin 1 gram, orally,
single dose
Cefixime 400 mg, orally, single
dose
plus
Azithromycin 1 gram, orally,
single dose
Ceftriaxone 250 mg,
intramuscularly, single dose
plus
Azithromycin 1 gram, orally,
single dose
or
Cefixime 400 mg, orally,
single dose
plus
Azithromycin 1 gram, orally,
single dose
C. trachomatis
Doxycycline 100 mg, orally,
twice daily for 7 days
(to be given only if gonorrhoea
therapy did not include
azithromycin)
Azithromycin 1 gram, orally,
single dose
or
Erythromycin 500 mg, orally,
4 times a day for 7 days
or
Ofloxacin 200–400 mg,
orally, twice daily for 7 days
(to be given only if gonorrhoea
therapy did not include
azithromycin)
Erythromycin 500 mg, orally,
4 times a day for 7 days
or
Azithromycin 1 gram, orally,
single dose
(to be given only if gonorrhoea
therapy did not include
azithromycin)
M. genitalium
Azithromycin 500 gram,
orally day 1, 250 mg daily,
days 2–5 (absence of
macrolide resistance)
Azithromycin 500 gram,
orally, day 1, 250 mg daily,
days 2–5 (absence of
macrolide resistance)
aBecause of increasing antimicrobial resistance to azithromycin in N. gonorrhoeae and M. genitalium and reduced susceptibility of
N. gonorrhoeae to cephalosporins, WHO is in the process of revising current treatment recommendations and dosages.
58
Causative agents of pelvic inflammatory disease include N. gonorrhoeae, C. trachomatis and
bacteria associated with bacterial vaginosis. Facultative gram-negative rods and mycoplasmas
have also been implicated. Since differentiating between these clinically is impossible and
precise microbiological diagnosis is difficult, the treatment regimens must be effective against
this broad range of pathogens. The regimens recommended below are based on this principle.
9. LOWER ABDOMINAL PAIN
9.1 Recommendations for the management of lower
abdominal pain among women
For sexually active women with symptom of lower abdominal
pain, WHO suggests assessing for pelvic inflammatory disease and
treating syndromically.
(Conditional
recommendation;
low-certainty
evidence)
Good practice includes:
•	taking a medical and sexual history and assessing the risk of
STIs;
•	performing a physical examination, including abdominal and
pelvic examination, to assess for pelvic inflammatory disease,
surgical conditions or pregnancy and vulvovaginal examination
to visualize any lesions, overt genital discharge, vulval erythema
and excoriations;
•	performing a bimanual digital examination of the vagina (1) to
assess for cervical motion tenderness or pain with palpation of
the pelvic area to exclude pelvic inflammatory disease; and (2) to
assess for the presence of vaginal discharge and the colour and
consistency of the discharge on the glove; and
•	offering HIV and syphilis testing and other preventive services as
recommended in other guidelines.
Good practice
statement
59
9. Lower abdominal pain
For sexually active women with lower abdominal pain with either
of the following features on clinical examination (bimanual
palpation):
•	cervical motion tenderness; or
•	lower abdominal tenderness:
WHO suggests the following.
•	Treat for pelvic inflammatory disease on the same visit.
•	Test for infection with N. gonorrhoeae and C. trachomatis and, if
available, M. genitalium, to support partner management when
tests are available.
•	Schedule follow-up assessment three days later to assess for
clinical improvement, and if the woman has not improved, refer
for further assessment.
(Conditional
recommendation;
moderate-
certainty
evidence)
For women with lower abdominal pain with any of the following
conditions, good practice includes referral to surgical or
gynaecological assessment:
•	missed or overdue period;
•	recent delivery, abortion or miscarriage;
•	abdominal guarding and/or rebound tenderness;
•	abnormal vaginal bleeding in excess of spotting;
•	abdominal mass; and
•	detection of a suspected cervical lesion.
Good practice
statement
60
Guidelines for the management of symptomatic sexually transmitted infections
Fig. 6. Flow chart for the management of lower abdominal pain
Offer HIV and syphilis testing and other preventive services
Take medical and sexual history and
assess risk for exposure to STIs
Genital examination (including bi-manual palpation)
and speculum examination (where feasible)
Sexually active woman with
symptom of lower abdominal pain
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Refer patient urgently for surgical or
gynaecological opinion and assessment.
Before referral set up an IV line and apply
resuscitative measures if necessary
Manage for PID
Test for NG/CT/MG if available*
See patient in 3 days
Manage
appropriately
Refer
patient
Any of the following present?
•	Missed/overdue period
•	Recent delivery/abortion/miscarriage
•	Abdominal guarding and/or rebound
tenderness
•	Abnormal vaginal bleeding
•	Abdominal mass
*to support partner notification.
NG, N.gonorrhoeae; CT, C. trachomatis; MG, M. genitalium.
No
No
No
No
Is there lower abdominal
tenderness or cervical
motion tenderness?
Patient has improved?
Any other
illness
found?
61
9. Lower abdominal pain
9.1.1 Evidence summary (Annex 5)
We conducted systematic reviews of the diagnostic accuracy of syndromic management
strategies to detect STIs (supplementary materials – systematic review lower abdominal
pain). To detect N. gonorrhoeae and C. trachomatis, the syndromic management
approach based on lower abdominal pain has 30% sensitivity and 73% specificity
(moderate-certainty evidence). The accuracy of various signs and symptoms has also
been calculated in individual studies. In a study of 623 women suspected of pelvic
inflammatory disease, the sensitivity and specificity of fever was 47% and 64%, vaginal
discharge 7% and 24% and tenderness of pelvic organs on bimanual examination
99% and 0.007%, respectively. In addition, a large study of 651 women in the United
States of America (PEACH study) using criteria similar to the previous WHO syndromic
management flow chart showed 83% sensitivity and 22% specificity. This accuracy
means that, in a population with 5% prevalence of pelvic inflammatory disease among
women with lower abdominal pain, 74% of the women would be unnecessarily treated
but only 1% would have pelvic inflammatory disease and be missed. Immediate
treatment of an acute pelvic inflammatory disease can avert adverse serious
consequences such as chronic pelvic pain, ectopic pregnancy and infertility (moderate-
certainty evidence). Therefore, higher value was placed on missing no woman with
pelvic inflammatory disease and moderate value (although less) was placed on reducing
the risk of transmitting STIs to partners.
Managing people presenting with lower abdominal pain based on a syndromic
approach results in moderate benefits and minor harm compared with treating everyone
or no treatment. The syndromic approach is already in place in most countries and
would therefore be feasible and acceptable. The Guideline Development Group agreed
that it would likely not negatively affect equity (in some settings it may increase equity)
and would incur negligible costs because of the low costs of assessment and treatment.
9.2 Treatment for people presenting with lower abdominal pain
If pelvic inflammatory disease is confirmed or suspected, the treatment options for managing
the person as an outpatient are shown in Table 6.
62
Guidelines for the management of symptomatic sexually transmitted infections
Table 6. Treatment options for pelvic inflammatory diseasea
•	 Therapy for uncomplicated N. gonorrhoeae (24)
plus
•	 Therapy for C. trachomatis (25)
plus
•	 Therapy for anaerobic infections
Infections
covered
First-line options
Effective substitutes
In settings in which local antimicrobial resistance data are not available, the WHO STI guidelines suggest dual therapy
for gonorrhoea.
N. gonorrhoeae
Ceftriaxone 250 mg, intramuscularly, single
dose
plus
Azithromycin 1 gram, orally, single dose
Cefixime 400 mg, orally, single dose
plus
Azithromycin 1 gram, orally, single dose
C. trachomatis
Doxycycline 100 mg, orally, twice daily for
14 days
Erythromycin 500 mg, four times daily for
14 days
(to be given only if gonorrhoea therapy did not
include azithromycin)
In settings in which local antimicrobial resistance data reliably confirm the susceptibility of N. gonorrhoeae to the
antimicrobial agent, singe therapy may be given as below.
N. gonorrhoeae
Ceftriaxone 250 mg, intramuscularly, single
dose
Cefixime 400 mg, orally, single dose
The treatment for anaerobes must be included in either treatment option above.
Anaerobes
Metronidazole 400 mg or 500 mg, orally,
twice daily for 14 days
aBecause of increasing antimicrobial resistance to azithromycin in N. gonorrhoeae and reduced susceptibility to cephalosporins,
WHO is in the process of revising current treatment recommendations and dosages.
Hospitalization of people with acute pelvic inflammatory disease should be seriously
considered under the following circumstances.
•	the diagnosis is uncertain;
•	surgical emergencies, such as appendicitis and ectopic pregnancy cannot be ruled out;
•	a pelvic abscess is suspected;
•	severe illness precludes management on an outpatient basis;
•	the person is pregnant;
•	the person is unable to follow or tolerate an outpatient regimen; or
•	the person has failed to respond to outpatient therapy.
63
The relative prevalence of causative organisms for genital ulcer disease varies considerably in
different parts of the world and may change dramatically over time. Currently, however, HSV-2
and HSV-1 have become the commonest causative agents of genital ulcer disease in many parts
of the world. The other causes frequently identified among people presenting with genital ulcer
disease are T. pallidum (syphilis) and C. trachomatis serovars L1–L3, causing lymphogranuloma
venereum and, less so, H. ducreyi (chancroid) (49,60,61).
Genital ulceration among people with primary syphilis occurs before serological laboratory tests
become positive; thus, laboratory findings are rarely helpful at the initial visit and may even be
misleading by being negative in the presence of syphilis infection. Further, in settings with a
high prevalence of syphilis, a person with a genital ulcer may have a reactive serological test for
syphilis from a previously treated infection, even if HSV-2 is the cause of the current ulcer.
In addition, since the differential diagnosis of genital ulcers using clinical judgement has been
shown to be inaccurate in over 50% of cases, even by experienced clinicians, the management
of people with genital ulcer disease must be based either on laboratory-based etiological
studies or a syndromic approach, guided by periodic evaluation of the causative agents at the
local setting.
10.1 Herpes simplex virus
10.1.1 Clinical presentation – symptoms
Although the observation of a cluster of vesicular lesions on the genital area or perianal area
is usually used as clinically indicative of genital herpes, other causes of genital ulcers, such
as syphilis and chancroid, may have a similar clinical appearance. Clinical manifestations and
patterns of genital ulcer disease may also be further altered in the presence of HIV infection.
First-episode genital herpes infections are those in which the person does not have a previous
history of genital herpes, and they are often associated with systemic and local symptoms of
fever, headache, malaise and myalgia, usually in the first 3–4 days. Locally, there may be pain,
itching, dysuria, vaginal or urethral discharge and tender inguinal lymphadenopathy. Among
both men and women with primary genital HSV infection, the presentation is with blistering
or ulcerative lesions on the external genitalia. The lesions may start as papules (pimples) or
vesicles (blisters), which spread rapidly over the genital area. The lesions may last up to 15–20
days until crusting and/or healing. Crusting does not occur on mucosal surfaces.
The first episode can be primary genital herpes in which the person is seronegative for HSV
antibodies, occurring after an incubation period of within 5–14 days of sexual contact. Initial
episodes of genital herpes refer to individuals who have the lesions for the first time but
already have antibodies to HSV-2, indicating past asymptomatic acquisition of HSV-2. Although
this would be the person’s first recognized episode, it would not indicate recent acquisition.
Recurrent genital herpes tends to have more localized symptoms of itching, recurrent ulcers
and mild pain, and the duration of the episode averages between four and five days but may
be as long as up to 12–15 days.
10. GENITAL ULCER DISEASE SYNDROME
64
Guidelines for the management of symptomatic sexually transmitted infections
10.1.2 Examination findings – signs
Among both men and women, a cluster of vesicopustular or ulcerative lesions is observed on
the external genitalia (penis, urethral meatus, scrotum, pubic area and vulva) or on the anal
and perianal areas (anus and buttocks). The patients may describe them as having started
as papules or vesicles that spread rapidly. Multiple small vesicular lesions may coalesce into
large ulcers. Most people with HSV-2 infection present at later stages of ulceration and hardly
show the typical vesicles of early HSV-2 manifestation. However, when a person has a typical
appearance of a crop of vesicles or gives a history of recurrent ulcers, a presumptive diagnosis
of genital herpes can be made and treatment tailored appropriately.
Among immunosuppressed individuals, these ulcers may persist and continue to expand
laterally and superficially for a considerable period of time if not treated. Since the ulceration of
herpes is shallow (intraepidermal), residual scarring from these lesions is uncommon.
10.1.3 Molecular testing
Amplified molecular detection by PCR of HSV DNA from swabs of genital lesions is the most
sensitive and specific test. Using a combined HSV and T. pallidum PCR, when available, would
be of added benefit to implicate or exclude syphilis at the same time. PCR assays have also
been developed for HSV-1 and HSV-2.
10.1.4 Culture methods
Culture enables replication of the virus for determining resistance to antiviral therapy and for
confirming diagnosis, but results take about 2–4 days, and culture requires appropriate viral
transport medium and special expertise to be a viable procedure. In expert hands, culture from
vesicles has the highest yield of about 94% rather than from pustules or ulcer base. Crusted
lesions give the lowest yield of about 27%.
10.1.5 Serology
Type-specific antibody tests can distinguish between HSV-1 and HSV-2. However, even
immunoglobulin G (IgG)-based type-specific testing for HSV-1 and HSV-2 antibodies has limited
value in diagnosis. The usefulness of testing is only by demonstrating seroconversion from a
negative result at the time of the lesions to a positive result 6–12 weeks later. Although IgM
detection can be used in diagnosing a new herpes infection, as many as 35% of the people
with recurrent herpes episodes have IgM responses. IgM is therefore a poor marker of new
infection and has limited diagnostic value (62).
10.2 Syphilis
Syphilis is a systemic disease caused by the spirochaete T. pallidum. The infection can be classified
as congenital or acquired. Congenital syphilis is transmitted from mother to child in utero.
Acquired syphilis is divided into early and late syphilis. Early syphilis comprises the primary,
secondary and early latent stages – syphilis of less than two years from acquisition of infection.
Late syphilis refers to late latent syphilis, gummatous, nervous system and cardiovascular syphilis.
65
10. Genital ulcer disease syndrome
10.2.1 Clinical presentation – symptoms
Primary syphilis is characterized by an ulcer (syphilitic chancre) at the site of infection that
develops after an incubation period of about three weeks from sexual contact but can range
from nine to 90 days. The ulcers are usually single lesions and painless. The person with
syphilis may miss them if they occur on concealed areas, such as the rectum, the cervix or
the pharynx. If not treated, the ulcer will heal without scarring after some 2–10 weeks. The
infection may then progress to the secondary stage.
Secondary syphilis sets in about six weeks to six months after infection. In some instances of
secondary syphilis, especially among immunosuppressed individuals, the chancre may still be
visible at the time secondary manifestation of syphilis occur. At this stage, the spirochaetes enter
the blood stream and may cause systemic symptoms of fever, malaise, arthralgia and anorexia. If
not treated at this stage, syphilis enters latency which might be followed by the tertiary stage of
syphilis. A more detailed account of the natural history of syphilis is available (26).
Below follows a summary of clinical presentations of the different stages of syphilis and some
guidance for diagnosis, followed by recommendations for a syndromic approach for managing
people with syphilis and a summary of commonly used tests for diagnosing syphilis.
10.2.2 Examination findings – signs and laboratory diagnosis
10.2.2.1 Primary syphilis
Primary syphilis comprises one or more ulcerated lesions called the chancre of syphilis at
the site of initial infection. The lesions are minimally tender or nontender and may have
characteristic indurated edges with a clean base. Regional lymph nodes may be felt within the
first week. The mouth and anus must also be examined for ulcers. Ulcers heal even without
treatment in 2–10 weeks.
The following diagnostic tests are used:
– darkfield microscopy – syphilitic treponemes from lesions of primary syphilis observed (see
section on microscopy); a negative dark-field result does not exclude syphilis;
– molecular detection – PCR testing can directly detect T. pallidum from lesion samples; and
– serology – both nontreponemal (such as RPR) and treponemal tests (such as TPHA and
rapid syphilis strip test) are negative in the early phase of primary syphilis, taking 1–4
weeks after the chancre appears to become reactive (Fig. 7).
A negative RPR or rapid syphilis test therefore does not exclude syphilis at the primary syphilis
stage. Tests should be repeated at four and 12 weeks from the initial testing to be certain if the
person does not receive treatment.
66
Guidelines for the management of symptomatic sexually transmitted infections
10.2.2.2 Secondary syphilis
Secondary syphilis presents with signs of disseminated syphilis, about 3–6 weeks after
infection, but this can be as long as six months. The manifestations may include any of the
following:
•	a generalized maculo-papular rash that is usually asymptomatic or mildly itchy and may also
be seen on the palms and plantar surfaces of feet;
•	patchy alopecia;
•	generalized lymphadenopathy;
•	condylomata lata – hypertrophic lesions resembling flat warts in the moist areas, such as
the labia and perineum, the folds of the foreskin and around the anus that are teeming with
spirochaetes and are therefore highly contagious; and
•	painless shallow ulcers of the oral or genital mucous membranes (mucous patches) that are
highly contagious.
The following diagnostic tests are used:
– dark-field microscopy – syphilitic treponemes can be observed from lesions of secondary
syphilis, such as condylomata lata and mucous patches;
– molecular detection – T. pallidum can be detected by molecular methods from lesions of
secondary syphilis; and
– serology – both nontreponemal (such as RPR) and treponemal tests (such as TPHA and a
rapid syphilis test) are almost always reactive (positive) in secondary syphilis, and usually
in high titre (Fig. 7).
A negative treponemal test at this stage of syphilis can reasonably be used to rule out syphilis.
Rarely, some people may have such high levels of antibody that give a false-negative result
with nontreponemal tests – a prozone phenomenon. Nontreponemal tests usually have high
titres of 1:16 or greater at this stage of infection. Titres decline with adequate treatment and
can be used to monitor response to treatment at three-monthly intervals for at least 1 year.
10.2.2.3 Early latent syphilis
As its name implies, latent syphilis has no clinical manifestations. The lesions of primary
syphilis and those of secondary syphilis have resolved spontaneously and the infection goes
into latency. Early latent syphilis is infection of less than two years in duration, as designated
by WHO, based on the infectiousness of syphilis and its response to therapy during this stage
of infection.
During the first two years (primary, secondary and early latent) of syphilis infection, the
individual is infectious to the sex partner and there is a high risk of transmission to the fetus
during pregnancy. In addition, nearly 25% of those with syphilis in the first year of infection will
relapse and develop manifestations of secondary syphilis, termed mucocutaneous relapse (63).
67
10. Genital ulcer disease syndrome
10.2.2.4 Late latent syphilis
An infection of more than two years in duration without clinical evidence of treponemal
infection is referred to as late latent syphilis. In late latency, the individual with untreated
syphilis is less and less likely to transmit the infection to a sex partner and to the fetus during
pregnancy as the latency progresses.
Late latent syphilis is diagnosed with serological tests. Nontreponemal and treponemal tests
are mostly reactive (positive) in early latent and late latent syphilis, but nontreponemal tests,
such as the VDRL, may become negative in late latent syphilis (Fig. 7). A negative treponemal
test at this stage of infection can be taken as sufficient to rule out the diagnosis of syphilis.
Once the specific treponemal tests are positive, they remain reactive for the person’s lifetime.
Therefore, these tests cannot be used for monitoring the response to treatment.
Fig. 7 shows an overview of the reactivity of non-treponemal and treponemal serological tests
for syphilis and the effect of successful treatment. Serological tests for syphilis give only a
presumptive diagnosis of syphilis, and they must be interpreted together with a good sexual
history of the individual, a physical examination and information about any recent treatments
with antibiotics, especially for syphilis. A good medical history must also be obtained, since
some underlying conditions may cause a false-positive reaction with non-treponemal tests,
such as acute febrile illnesses, immunizations, pregnancy and autoimmune disorders, such as
rheumatoid arthritis and systemic lupus erythematosus. Such false positives are usually at low
titres of less than in 1:8 (64). If possible, positive non-treponemal tests (RPR or VDRL) should
be quantified (the titres should be determined).
Non-treponemal tests may be negative in primary syphilis for 1–4 weeks after the appearance
of the chancre (4–6 weeks after infection). The tests are reactive almost without exception in
secondary syphilis. As the duration of the early and late latent stages of syphilis increases, the
antibody titre decreases and may eventually give a negative result in late syphilis (late latent
and tertiary stages), even without treatment. With treatment, syphilis serology tests may revert
to negative depending on the stage of syphilis when treatment is instituted. This is more likely
to happen if the individual is treated during the primary or secondary stage of syphilis. If early
syphilis is treated, the non-treponemal test titres will decline and become negative and may
thus be used to monitor response to treatment. If the disease is diagnosed at the late syphilis
stage, low titres of non-treponemal tests may remain positive for life.
68
Guidelines for the management of symptomatic sexually transmitted infections
Fig. 7. Reactivity of serological tests by stage of syphilis and effect of
treatment
Source: Unemo et al. (48).
The specific treponemal tests, including TPHA, TPPA and fluorescent treponemal antibody
absorption, may become positive earlier than the non-treponemal tests. Once an individual
tests positive on a treponemal test, most (85%) remain positive on subsequent treponemal
tests even when the infection is successfully treated.
The more recent rapid syphilis tests in circulation are immunochromatographic strips with
treponemal antigens. These rapid syphilis tests are therefore equivalent to specific treponemal
tests, such as the TPHA and TPPA, and the results produced by such tests should be interpreted
as indicated in Fig. 7. A positive rapid syphilis test measures lifetime exposure to treponemal
infection and not necessarily active disease that requires treatment. If an RPR-equivalent
test is available, it should be performed following a positive rapid syphilis test to determine
whether there may be active syphilis infection or not. More detailed guidelines on the use and
interpretation of rapid syphilis tests are available (28). For details about the procedures for
performing rapid syphilis tests and RPR tests, see the WHO manual (48).
Further, in areas of high syphilis prevalence, a reactive serological test for syphilis may reflect a
previous infection and give a misleading picture of the person’s present condition. This is especially
important in populations at higher risk of STIs, who may end up being unnecessarily treated
repeatedly for syphilis. When available, an RPR test with titration may indicate which people need
treatment since false-positive or sero-fast reactions usually have titres of less than 1:8.
Early syphilis
Late syphilis
Negative
becoming
positive
Becomes
negative
Always
positive
Becoming
negative
Usually
positive
Becoming
negative
Usually
positive
Remains
positive
Usually
positive, but
becoming negative
Results
unchanged
Primary
Negative serological test
Positive serological test
Non-treponemal
syphilis serology
- Untreated
Non-treponemal
syphilis serology
- Treated
Treponemal
syphilis serology
- Untreated
Treponemal
syphilis serology
- Treated
Effect of treatment by stage of infection
Secondary
Tertiary
Early latent
Late latent
Negative
becoming
positive
(EARLY)
Remains
positive, if
initially positive
Usually positive,
eventually becoming
negative
Results
unchanged
Always
positive
Remains
positive
Always
positive
Remains
positive
Always
positive
Remains
positive
69
10. Genital ulcer disease syndrome
10.3 H. ducreyi (chancroid)
10.3.1 Clinical presentation – symptoms
Lesions of chancroid begin as an erythematous papule within hours to days of sexual exposure.
Over the following 1–2 days, the papule evolves into a pustule that breaks down and becomes
a painful ulcer. People usually seek health care at the stage of the painful ulcer. Among men,
the ulcers are usually on the penis (foreskin, shaft and sometimes on the glans), and as many
as 50% develop unilateral or bilateral painful inguinal lymph nodes. Large, painful, fluctuant
lymph nodes (buboes) may also occur. If not treated, buboes may suppurate and form fistulae
or ulcers.
In women, ulcers of chancroid are on the vulva, and anal ulcers from autoinoculation may also
occur. Ulcers among women may be asymptomatic, especially when they are internal. Women do
not frequently present with inguinal adenopathy because of the different lymphatic drainage.
10.3.2 Examination findings
There are generally single or multiple ulcers on the penile shaft, the foreskin or the glans penis,
usually deep with an irregular edge and a red margin. There is usually no induration, and the
base is granular or purulent. The ulcers are normally tender when being examined or when
walking. Men may have unilateral or bilateral inguinal buboes.
However, chancroid ulcers often have atypical clinical appearances and may dispel suspicion of
chancroid, with some small ulcers mimicking infected genital herpes. In HIV infection, the ulcers
may be less purulent and resemble syphilitic chancres. Also, people with immunosuppression may
have rapidly aggressive and erosive ulcers of chancroid to the point of anatomically destroying
the genital organs.
10.3.3 Laboratory diagnosis
H. ducreyi has been characteristically diagnosed by culture methods but only in limited
specialized centres because of the fastidious nature of the organism with a sensitivity of
75% compared with M-PCR from genital ulcer swabs. Although multiplex PCR for genital
ulcer disease, including H. ducreyi, has been developed, it is found only in research settings
and reference centres (65,66). Since H. ducreyi has almost disappeared globally as a cause of
genital ulcer disease (67,68), further advances in diagnostic tests for this pathogen are unlikely.
Clinicians must have a high index of suspicion when they see an unusually painful,
suppurative ulcer among men or women. If there are also painful inguinal lymph
nodes with the ulcer, especially among men, chancroid must be high in the differential
diagnosis. If in any particular setting more and more such lesions are being seen, then
the national authorities should be alerted to the fact so that the treatment regimen can
be adapted accordingly.
70
Guidelines for the management of symptomatic sexually transmitted infections
10.4 Recommendations for the management of genital ulcer
disease, including anorectal ulcers
For people who present with genital ulcers (including anorectal
ulcers), WHO recommends treatment based on quality-assured
molecular assays of the ulcer. However, in settings with limited or no
molecular tests or laboratory capacity, WHO recommends syndromic
treatment to ensure treatment on the same day of the visit.
(Strong
recommendation;
moderate-
certainty evidence
Good practice includes:
•	taking a medical and sexual history and assessing the risk of
STIs;
•	performing a physical examination of the genital and anal areas;
•	offering HIV and syphilis testing and other preventive services as
recommended in other guidelines; and
•	providing analgesics for pain.
Good practice
statement
Settings with quality-assured molecular testing in a laboratory with
a fully operational quality management system and results available
on the same day of the visit
For people with confirmed anogenital ulcers, WHO recommends
the following.
1.	 	Perform molecular assays (NAAT) from anogenital lesions to
confirm or exclude herpes simplex virus and Treponema pallidum
(syphilis).
2.	 Perform molecular assays from anogenital lesions to confirm
lymphogranuloma venereum in geographical settings and/or
populations iin which cases are reported or emerging.
3.	 Perform serological tests for syphilis, with appropriate
interpretation for management depending on the test or tests
used.
4.	Treat for syphilis and/or herpes simplex virus according to
the results available on the same day of the visit or treat
syndromically and revise management according to the results
when available.
5.	 Treat for lymphogranuloma venereum when the results are
positive.
6.	Treat for chancroid only in geographical settings where cases
are reported or emerging.
(Strong
recommendation;
moderate-
certainty
evidence)
71
10. Genital ulcer disease syndrome
Settings in which same-day treatment is not feasible with molecular
testing or with limited or no molecular testing
For people with confirmed anogenital ulcers, WHO suggests the
following.
1.	 	Treat syndromically for syphilis and herpes simplex virus on the
same day.
2.	 Treat for herpes simplex virus if the ulcer is recurrent or
vesicular, and treat for syphilis if the person has no history of
recent treatment for syphilis (in the past three months).
3.	 Treat for chancroid only in geographical settings where cases
are reported or emerging.
(Conditional
recommendation;
moderate-
certainty
evidence)
Good practice includes.
•	performing serological tests for syphilis, including an RPR-
equivalent test, if available, to attempt to identify active syphilis
and for monitoring the response to treatment; and
•	referring men with persistent anogenital ulcers to a centre with
laboratory capacity and expertise to diagnose herpes or less
common pathogens (lymphogranuloma venereum, donovanosis
and chancroid) and other genital or gastrointestinal conditions.
Remarks
Genital ulcer disease refers to breaks in the skin or mucosa and
may present as ulcers, sores or vesicles. Anogenital ulcers refer to
those located on the genital or anal areas and may be painful or
painless.
A negative serological test for syphilis when anogenital ulcers
have been present for less than three weeks does not definitively
exclude syphilis, since antibodies may not yet be present to be
detected by a serological test for syphilis. See WHO guidance on
interpreting syphilis tests (see subsection 10.2).
Good practice
statement
72
Guidelines for the management of symptomatic sexually transmitted infections
Fig. 8. Flow chart for the management of genital ulcer disease including
anorectal ulcers
HSV, herpes simplex virus
* If molecular assay was performed and results were not available on same day, revise the syndromic treatment initially provided
according to the test results when available
Take medical and sexual history
and assess risk for STIs
Physical examination of genital and anal areas
Review in 1 week if symptoms persist or recur
Treat based on test results
on same day
TREAT for HSV
Treat for syphilis
Offer HIV and syphilis testing and other preventive services
Person with symptom of genital ulcer
Perform test
Limited or no laboratory
capacity
Sore or ulcer present?
Are results available
on same day?
Resources and capacity for
molecular assays (e.g., NAAT)
Is test positive for HSV
and/or syphilis?
History of recent syphilis
treatment (past 3 months)?
Ulcer vesicular or history of
recurrent ulcers in same site?
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
No
No
Yes
No*
Treat for HSV
and syphilis
No
73
10. Genital ulcer disease syndrome
10.4.1 Evidence summary (Annex 6)
These recommendations were informed by evidence that was of high and moderate
certainty from a systematic review of the sensitivity and specificity of using a clinical
diagnosis of an STI pathogen based on the presence of an anogenital ulcer. No studies
were found for clinical diagnosis of lymphogranuloma venereum (supplementary
material – systematic review genital ulcer disease).
For detecting syphilis, which typically ranges from 5% to 10% as a cause of anogenital
ulcers, if clinical diagnosis was used for 100 people with ulcers (sensitivity 64% and
specificity 84%), about 2–4 cases would be missed, and 14–15 people would be falsely
identified as having syphilis and unnecessarily treated. Alternatively, if all 100 people
with an anogenital ulcer were treated for syphilis, 90–95 would be unnecessarily
treated but no cases would be missed. Molecular assays could reduce the number
of people unnecessarily treated or missed cases (since they are highly sensitive and
specific), but the costs of diagnostics may be high and inaccessible. The WHO Guideline
Development Group assessed the long-term consequences of a missed case of syphilis
as more important than the number of people unnecessarily treated (false positives) and
the cost of unnecessary treatment and therefore suggests treating all ulcers for syphilis
when there is limited testing capacity. Other challenges of managing people with
syphilis, such as with medications, are likely not linked to cost but to logistical support
for procuring and distributing medications.
For detecting herpes, which typically ranges from 30% to 70% as a cause of
anogenital ulcers, using a clinical diagnosis for 100 people with ulcers (sensitivity
40% and specificity 88%), about 18–42 cases of herpes would be missed and about
4–8 people with an ulcer would be identified falsely and be unnecessarily treated.
Treating all 100 people with an anogenital ulcer for herpes would mean that 30–70
people would be unnecessarily treated, but the cost of treatment may be relatively
inexpensive. The WHO Guideline Development Group agreed that it is uncertain
that missing a case would lead to serious long-term harm. It likely contributes to
increased HIV acquisition or HSV transmission and means discomfort for the people
with symptoms (69). Treating everyone with a genital ulcer for herpes was therefore
suggested for improving the quality of life when there is limited capacity for laboratory
testing. The Guideline Development Group agreed that treating everyone is likely
feasible, the costs of treatment would be negligible and be acceptable to all and would
likely not have negatively affect equity (in some settings it may increase equitable
access to treatment).
The systematic review of the literature found that the prevalence of chancroid has
been decreasing in high-income and low- and middle-income countries alike and
using a clinical diagnosis to determine treatment of chancroid therefore results in
only a trivial number of missed cases and greater unnecessary treatment. Based on
the current prevalence of chancroid, the Guideline Development Group therefore
agreed to suggest no treatment for chancroid for people with anogenital ulcers, unless
surveillance shows reported or emerging cases. Although no evidence was found for
lymphogranuloma venereum and the cost-benefit and harm of clinical diagnosis, the
Guideline Development Group agreed that performing tests for lymphogranuloma
venereum would also depend on the number of emerging cases and suggested no
treatment for lymphogranuloma venereum unless a test was positive.
74
Guidelines for the management of symptomatic sexually transmitted infections
10.5 Treatment of genital ulcer disease, including anorectal
ulcers
Table 7 outlines treatment options for the syndromic management of people with genital ulcer
disease. Syndromic management should include treatment for syphilis, unless the person has
been treated for syphilis within the past three months, and treatment for herpes.
For persons with recurrent ulcers that are too frequent (such as 4–6 episodes or more a
year) or with severe symptoms or causing distress, suppressive therapy may be proposed and
preferred to episodic treatment (27). People receiving suppressive therapy may be assessed
after one year and asked whether they want to continue or to change to episodic therapy. Note
that recurrence rates may revert to the period before suppressive therapy started, and patients
need to be aware of that.
For people living with HIV and immunosuppressed individuals, dose adjustments are
recommended for valaciclovir and famciclovir but not for acyclovir.
•	For recurrent episodes, valaciclovir 500 mg is recommended for five days instead of three
days, and famciclovir is recommended at a dose of 500 mg twice daily for five days instead
of 250 mg.
•	For suppressive therapy, valaciclovir is recommended at 500 mg twice daily instead of once
daily and famciclovir at 500 mg twice daily instead of 250 mg twice daily.
People who report allergies to penicillin should be treated with the effective alternatives for
syphilis, which include doxycycline and erythromycin.
75
10. Genital ulcer disease syndrome
Table 7. Recommended treatment options for genital ulcer disease
•	 Multiple-dose therapy for herpes simplex virus infection (27)
Plus
•	 Single-dose long-acting penicillin therapy or multi-dose therapy of alternatives (26)
Infections
covered
First-line options
Effective substitutes
For pregnant and
breastfeeding women and
people younger than 16
years
Genital herpes
Primary infection
Acyclovir 400 mg, orally, 3
times a day for 10 days
or
Acyclovir 200 mg, orally, 5
times a day for 10 days
Primary infection
Valaciclovir 500 mg, twice a
day for 10 days
or
Famciclovir 250 mg, orally, 3
times a day for 10 days
Primary infection
Use acyclovir only when the
benefit outweighs the risk.
The dosage is the same as
for primary infection in non-
pregnancy.
Recurrent infection –
episodic therapy
Acyclovir 400 mg, orally, 3
times a day for 5 days
or
Acyclovir 800 mg, orally,
twice daily for 5 days
or
Acyclovir 800 mg, 3 times a
day for 2 days
Recurrent infection –
episodic
Valaciclovir 500 mg, twice
daily for 5 days
or
Famciclovir 250 mg, orally,
twice daily for 5 days
Recurrent infection –
episodic therapy
Acyclovir 400 mg, orally, 3
times a day for 5 days
or
Acyclovir 800 mg, orally,
twice daily for 5 days
or
Acyclovir 800 mg, 3 times a
day, for 2 days
Suppressive therapy for
recurrent herpesa
Acyclovir 400 mg, orally,
twice daily
or
Valaciclovir 500 mg, once
daily
Suppressive therapy for
recurrencesa
Famciclovir 250 mg, orally,
twice daily
Suppressive therapy for
recurrent herpes
Acyclovir 400 mg, orally,
twice daily
or
Valaciclovir 500 mg, once
daily
Syphilis (early)
(treatment for
primary, secondary
and early latent
[less than two
years since
infection] syphilis)
Benzathine penicillin 2.4
million units, intramuscularly
in a single dose
Doxycycline 100 mg, orally,
twice a day for 14 days
or
Erythromycin 500 mg, 4
times a day for 14 days
Benzathine penicillin 2.4
million units, intramuscularly
in a single dose
or
Erythromycin 500 mg, orally,
4 times a day for 14 daysb
Syphilis (late)
(treatment for late
latent and tertiary
syphilis)
Benzathine penicillin 2.4
million units by intramuscular
injection, once weekly for 3
consecutive weeks
Procaine penicillin 1.2
million units by intramuscular
injection, once daily for 20
consecutive days
or
Doxycycline 100 mg, orally,
twice daily for 30 days
Erythromycin 500mg orally,
4 times a day for 30 daysb
aSuppressive therapy for recurrent herpes is recommended for individuals with 4–6 or more recurrent episodes per year, severe
symptoms or episodes that cause distress. Increased dosages or duration of treatment are required for people living with HIV
(27).
bAlthough erythromycin is used to treat pregnant women, it does not cross the placental barrier completely and the fetus is not
treated. The newborn infant therefore needs treatment soon after delivery.
76
Anorectal symptoms and anorectal STIs are prevalent among men who have sex with men,
female sex workers, transgender people and heterosexual women who engage in anal sexual
intercourse.
11.1 Anatomical sites of infection
Infections of the anorectal region can be divided into the following anatomical sites:
•	anal infections: infections of the anus and perianal area involving the stratified squamous
epithelium – a common site for pathogens such as HPV, HSV and syphilis;
•	proctitis: infections from the dentate line to the rectosigmoid junction – a common site for
gonococcal and chlamydial infections and HSV (the dentate line is the line between the
simple columnar epithelium of the rectum and the stratified epithelium of the anal canal,
usually defined as being at the level of the anal valves; and
•	proctocolitis: infections of the rectum and colon – a common site for infections with Shigella,
Campylobacter, Salmonella and cytomegalovirus and amoebiasis.
For syndromic diagnosis and management, these infections have been grouped under
anorectal infections. Anorectal infections may be associated with anorectal pain, itching,
discharge, bleeding, sensation of rectal fullness, tenesmus, constipation and mucus streaking
of stools.
Asymptomatic anorectal infections are not uncommon, although precise data are scarce. The
people at highest risk of asymptomatic anorectal infections are men who have sex with men,
male and female sex workers, transgender people and women who have had receptive anal
intercourse with men with STIs.
11.2 Sexual practices that may be associated with anorectal
infections
Specific high-risk sexual behaviour associated with anorectal infections include receptive
anal sex, oro-anal contact (anilingus or rimming), fisting (inserting a hand into the rectum
or vagina), fingering (touching another’s genitals or anus using fingers or digital-vaginal
penetration), nudging (unprotected penile-anal external contact without penetration), dipping
(partly inserting or briefly inserting the penis into the anus without a condom, followed by
immediate withdrawal) and sharing sex toys.
11.3 Examination
An examination for anal infections includes an external examination of the anus and, where
available, an anoscopy. In asymptomatic infections, anoscopy can be performed, possibly with
Gram-stained smear and a count of the number of polymorphonucleated leukocytes to screen
for STIs. However, an anoscope is not available in most primary point-of-care settings, and an
external examination may be the only practical procedure to observe a discharge, ulcers or
external warts.
11. ANORECTAL DISCHARGE
77
11. Anorectal discharge
Although an anoscopic examination can be used to take samples for Gram-stained smear
for N. gonorrhoeae and for leukocytes, as well as for culture of N. gonorrhoeae, samples for
nucleic acid amplification tests for Chlamydia and dark-field microscopy for T. pallidum, the
performance of such tests on rectal specimens is not well established. However, some test
kits have been licensed for use on rectal specimens. Little or no data exist to validate using
microscopy in diagnosing anorectal infections.
In many low- and middle-income countries, male and females sex workers have similar rates
of anorectal infection (70–72). A more practical approach in such a situation might be periodic
presumptive treatment for high-risk men or presumptive treatment at the first visit, but there is
limited experience with the outcomes of such an approach in anorectal infections for both men
and women.
Given the limited data and information on both symptomatic and asymptomatic anorectal
infections, the providing care for people with STIs associated with anorectal infections requires
close supervision and research, especially in populations at high risk of infection. Research
is also needed to validate laboratory tests on rectal specimens and to validate the treatment
choices for anorectal infections.
Knowledge of the prevalence of asymptomatic, seroreactive syphilis infection among men who
have sex with men can be helpful in adapting the flow chart to include syphilis treatment for
those at high risk of infection and for those with ulcerative disease.
11.4 Recommendations for the management of
anorectal discharge
For people with symptom of anorectal discharge and report
receptive anal sex, WHO recommends management based on the
results of quality-assured molecular assays. However, in settings
with limited or no molecular tests or laboratory capacity, WHO
recommends syndromic treatment to ensure treatment on the same
day of the visit.
(Strong
recommendation;
moderate-
certainty
evidence)
Good practice includes:
•	taking a medical and sexual history and assessing the risk of
STIs;
•	performing a physical examination of the genital and perianal
areas and a digital rectal examination, if acceptable (and
anoscopy, if available and acceptable);
•	offering HIV and syphilis testing and other preventive services as
recommended in other guidelines; and
•	referring for other investigations when anorectal discharge
is unrelated to a sexually transmitted infection, such as other
gastrointestinal conditions.
Good practice
statement
78
Guidelines for the management of symptomatic sexually transmitted infections
Settings with quality-assured molecular testing in a laboratory with
a fully operational quality management system and results available
on the same day of the visit
WHO recommends the following.
1.	 	Perform molecular assays (NAAT) using a self-collected or
clinician-collected anorectal swab to confirm or exclude
infection with N. gonorrhoeae and/or C. trachomatis and treat
the individual infections detected.
2.	 Treat, additionally, for herpes simplex virus if there is anorectal
pain.
3.	 Follow the genital ulcer guidelines if ulceration is present.
(Strong
recommendation;
moderate-
certainty
evidence)
Settings in which same-day treatment is not feasible with
molecular testing or with limited or no molecular testing
WHO suggests the following.
1.	 	Treat for N. gonorrhoeae and C. trachomatis if discharge is
present.
2.	 Treat, additionally, for herpes simplex virus if there is anorectal
pain.
(Conditional
recommendation;
moderate-
certainty
evidence)
Good practice includes:
•	following the genital ulcer guidelines if ulceration is present; and
•	referring people with persistent anorectal discharge to a
centre with laboratory capacity to diagnose N. gonorrhoeae,
C. trachomatis (including lymphogranuloma venereum serovars)
and M. genitalium and determine antimicrobial resistance for
N. gonorrhoeae and M. genitalium.
Good practice
statement
79
11. Anorectal discharge
Fig. 9. Flow chart for the management of anorectal discharge
NG, N.gonorrhoeae; CT, C. trachomatis; MG, M. genitalium.
Take medical and sexual history and
assess risk for exposure to STIs
Perform genital and peri-anal inspection
(and anoscopy if available or digital exam
if acceptable)
Review in 1 week if symptoms persist or recur
Treat based on results
TREAT for NG and CT
TREAT additionally for herpes simplex virus
Refer for other investigations
if anorectal discharge not
related to STIs
Offer HIV and syphilis testing and other preventive services
Person with symptom of anorectal discharge
and reports receptive anal sex
Perform test
Resources and capacity for molecular assays
Limited laboratory capacity
Is there pain?
Is test positive
for NG/CT/MG?
Anorectal discharge present?
Yes
Yes
No
No
No
Yes
80
Guidelines for the management of symptomatic sexually transmitted infections
11.4.1 Evidence summary (Annex 7)
These recommendations were informed by evidence that was of moderate certainty
from a systematic review of the sensitivity and specificity of using syndromic
management based on anorectal discharge to diagnose N. gonorrhoeae and/or C.
trachomatis (supplementary materials – systematic review anorectal discharge). When
available, performing molecular assay tests for N. gonorrhoeae and C. trachomatis as
well as C. trachomatis (serovars L1, L2 and L3) causing lymphogranuloma venereum and
M. genitalium and basing treatment on these results leads to the most people treated
correctly. If the previously recommended syndromic management algorithm was used
for 100 people with anorectal discharge in which 20–50% would typically have N.
gonorrhoeae or C. trachomatis (with 32% sensitivity and 82% specificity), then 9–15
would be falsely identified with N. gonorrhoeae or C. trachomatis and unnecessarily
treated and 14–34 would be missed. The previously recommended algorithm is based
on assessment of risk, anorectal pain and discharge. The Guideline Development
Group agreed that the numbers of cases missed using syndromic management means
many people would continue to harbour the infections, which would increase the
risk of transmission to others and the risk of acquiring and transmitting HIV. Instead,
when molecular assay tests are not available, although the number of people treated
unnecessarily would be high, if everyone with anorectal discharge were treated for N.
gonorrhoeae or C. trachomatis, no cases would be missed.
Managing people presenting with anorectal discharge based on a syndromic
approach results in minor benefits and moderate harm compared with molecular
testing or treating everyone. Molecular testing may not be feasible in all settings and,
alternatively, treating everyone would be feasible and the costs would be negligible.
11.5 Treatment recommendations for anorectal infections
In implementing a flow chart for managing people with anorectal infections, the following
should be considered:
•	establishing that the person engages in anal sex;
•	differentiating between anorectal infection and other disease; and
•	thresholds for adding treatment for HSV, lymphogranuloma venereum or syphilis.
The choice of medicines, dosage and duration of treatment do not generally differ from those
for infections at other anatomical sites. Table 8 summarizes treatment options for anorectal
infections.
Generally, the following syndromic treatment of symptomatic people is recommended: for
chlamydia, doxycycline 100 mg twice daily for seven days (extended to 21 days to cover
lymphogranuloma venereum if NAAT is positive for C. trachomatis) or azithromycin 1 g at once
(25) plus ceftriaxone 250 mg intramuscularly or cefixime 400 mg orally as single doses for
gonorrhoea, and with acyclovir, valaciclovir or famciclovir for HSV infection (27), if indicated.
If ulcerations are seen, treatment should follow the flow chart for genital ulcers as well and
consider managing the person for syphilis and/or lymphogranuloma venereum.
81
11. Anorectal discharge
Table 8. Treatment options for people with anorectal dischargea
Recommended treatment regimens for anorectal infections
Infections
covered
First-line options
Effective substitutes
N. gonorrhoeae
(24)
Ceftriaxone 250 mg, intramuscularly, single
dose
plus
Azithromycin 1 gram, orally, single dose
Cefixime 400 mg, orally, single dose
plus
Azithromycin 1 gram, orally, single dose
C. trachomatis
(25)
Doxycycline 100 mg orally, twice daily, for
7 days
or
Doxycycline for 21 days (to cover rectal
lymphogranuloma venereum) if suspected or
confirmed on NAAT
(to be given only if dual therapy did not include
azithromycin)
Erythromycin 500 mg, orally, 4 times a day
for 14 days
(to be given only if dual therapy did not include
azithromycin)
Syphilis (26)
(if ulcer present)
Benzathine penicillin 2.4 million units
intramuscularly, single dose
People with a positive syphilis test and no ulcer:
administer the same dose at weekly intervals
for a total of three doses
Doxycycline 100 mg orally, twice daily for
14 days
Erythromycin 500 mg 4 times a day, orally,
for 14 days
Extend treatment to 30 days if syphilis serology
is positive
Genital herpes
(27)
Recurrent infection:
Acyclovir 400 mg, orally, 3 times a day for 5
days
or
Acyclovir 800 mg, orally, 3 times a day for 2
days
or
Acyclovir 800 mg, orally, 2 times a day for 5
days
Recurrent infection:
Valaciclovir 500 mg, twice daily for 3 days
Primary genital herpes:
Acyclovir 400 mg, orally, 3 times a day for
10 days
or
Acyclovir 200 mg, 5 times a day for 10 days
Primary genital herpes:
Valaciclovir 500 mg, orally, twice daily for
10 days
Suppressive therapy for recurrent herpes
Acyclovir 400 mg, orally, twice daily
or
Valaciclovir 500 mg, once daily
For duration, see the genital ulcer disease
section
Suppressive therapy for recurrences
Famciclovir 250 mg, orally, twice daily
(Famciclovir 500 mg, twice daily for people
living with HIV or immunocompromised)
aBecause of increasing antimicrobial resistance to azithromycin in N. gonorrhoeae and reduced susceptibility to cephalosporins,
WHO is in the process of revising current treatment recommendations and dosages.
82
12.1 Dissemination
The syndromic guidelines will be made available as a printed publication and as downloadable
documents on the WHO website under sexually transmitted infections – guidelines. There will
be links to other supporting documentation at https://www.who.int/health-topics/sexually-
transmitted-infections#tab=tab_1.
WHO headquarters will work with WHO regional offices and country offices to ensure that
countries receive support in adapting, implementing and monitoring these guidelines. All
levels of WHO (headquarters, regional offices and country offices) will work with regional and
national partners – including the United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA), the United Nations
Children’s Fund (UNICEF), the Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS), NGOs
and other agencies implementing HIV, STI and sexual and reproductive health services to
ensure an integrated approach to preventing and controlling STIs. WHO will ensure that these
external partners are fully engaged in supporting the dissemination and implementation of
these guidelines.
These guidelines will also be disseminated at conferences related to STIs and HIV and
conferences linked with HIV and STIs and sexual and reproductive health. Efforts will be made
to disseminate the information recommended in these guidelines through electronic media,
especially during restrictions on meetings because of the COVID-19 pandemic.
The approved guidelines will be officially launched and followed by regional webinars to
disseminate the guidelines. WHO will also work with Project ECHO (Extension for Community
Healthcare Outcomes), which has been previously partnered with in the WHO African Region
in disseminating WHO HIV guidelines using the amplified Internet connectivity and wide
network of health-care providers. WHO will also work with the Integrated Best Practice
Platform to disseminate the guidelines to health-care providers providing sexual and
reproductive health services.
12.2 Updating the STI guidelines and user feedback
A system of monitoring relevant new evidence and updating the recommendations in these
guidelines will be established and mechanisms for disseminating the new information put
into operation. Some of the mechanisms will be by electronic communication. An electronic
follow-up survey of key end-users of these guidelines will be conducted after one year of
their dissemination. The results of the survey will be used to identify challenges and barriers
to the uptake of the guidelines, to evaluate their usefulness in improving service delivery for
STIs and to identify topics or gaps in managing people with STIs that need to be addressed in
future editions.
12. DISSEMINATION AND IMPLEMENTATION
OF THE GUIDELINES
83
12. Dissemination and implementation of the guidelines
12.3 Implementation considerations
12.3.1 Adaptation, implementation and monitoring
These guidelines provide recommendations for providing STI services, mainly using the
syndromic approach to enable countries and settings with limited resources to provide
evidence-informed interventions for managing people with symptomatic STIs. These guidelines
address the syndromes of urethral discharge among men, vaginal discharge and pelvic
inflammatory disease among women, genital ulcers among men and women and anorectal
infections among men and women.
However, the epidemiology of the specific pathogens causing the syndromes needs to be
established in each setting since there is wide geographical variation. Further, the patterns
of antimicrobial resistance need to be monitored and may necessitate adapting the choice of
medicines used in each syndrome. In areas lacking local data as a basis for adaptation, the
recommendations in these guidelines can be adopted as presented since there has been global
assessment before inclusion in these guidelines.
12.3.1.1 Opportunities for integrated approaches
•	Testing opportunities using rapid point-of-care tests
Existing services should be used for making the etiological diagnosis of STIs. Many countries
have facilities for implementing point-of-care testing for diagnosing HIV infection. Already,
many countries have adopted the dual or triple elimination projects to test for HIV, syphilis
and/or viral hepatitis at the same time. This should be scaled up for people seeking care for
STIs, people receiving PrEP for HIV infection, young people undergoing voluntary medical
male circumcision and others.
•	Testing opportunities using molecular testing technologies
The molecular platform (such as for tuberculosis antimicrobial resistance diagnosis or viral
load detection) is available in many countries. Molecular testing can be expanded at specific
sentinel sites or designated laboratories to include detecting STIs, determining the causes of
STI syndromes and possibly incorporating the detection of antimicrobial resistance genetic
markers in pathogens such as N. gonorrhoeae and M. genitalium as technologies advance
and become affordable and more accessible.
•	Integrated training of health-care providers
Health-care providers should be trained jointly in implementing the guidelines to enhance
services for HIV and the other STIs, antenatal care and family planning care.
12.3.1.2 Establishing referral centres and sentinel site laboratories
Countries should establish or strengthen sentinel sites that can provide support to primary
health-care services that need specialist services, such as an STI expert or physician or
gynaecologist or genitourinary referral centres for or places to refer people with persistent or
recurrent STIs. At the same time, these centres or nearby laboratories can be equipped and
strengthened to provide support for STI programmes in areas such as etiological studies and
antimicrobial resistance monitoring.
84
In June 2020, the Department of Global HIV, Hepatitis & STI Programmes convened a think-
tank meeting of experts to propose strategic areas of focus for preventing and controlling STIs.
One area that got input from the meeting was STI surveillance and its importance in putting
STIs on the global agenda. It was highlighted that surveillance is the backbone of public health,
and poor surveillance and lack of data on STIs undermine the importance of STIs and their
burden on populations. Some of the key areas that need to be implemented are as follows.
13.1 Challenges in STI surveillance and anticipated responses
The challenges in STI surveillance include:
•	difficulty in conducting robust surveillance when laboratory testing is not available to detect
STIs and understand the causes of STI syndromes;
•	the asymptomatic nature of many STIs, resulting in a significant burden of infections being
missed for lack of diagnostic testing; and
•	limited linking of laboratory data to epidemiological data in many settings.
Ongoing STI surveillance at the country level therefore needs to be strengthened. The few
data that are available should be used as stepping stones to improve surveillance by using
the gaps for planning and programming to obtain more robust data. This should be done on
continuously and not only periodically.
•	Since the syndromic approach is widely used in STI country programmes, countries should
keep on top of the causes of the STI syndromes emerging by regularly conducting etiological
studies from sentinel sites using molecular assays, linked to other programmes, if necessary.
•	STI surveillance should be an integral part of the syndromic approach, linked with periodic
assessment of the antimicrobial resistance of key pathogens.
•	The complications of STIs are another component that adds to the disease burden, and
routine STI surveillance should incorporate monitoring of STI complications within STI
management reporting systems.
•	STI surveillance in key populations remains fundamental, since the STI prevalence in these
populations remains a significant contributor to the STI epidemic. For this, the collaboration
of NGOs should be sought and strengthened to harness these stakeholders as sources of
data. Regular systematic STI surveillance and screening for STIs among key populations
would be more relevant than occasional surveillance in providing information for effective
interventions.
•	Capacity-building is required for STI surveillance and monitoring. This requires strengthening
laboratories by investing in human resources for laboratories and fostering the availability of
and access to affordable STI diagnostic tests.
•	Advocating for funding is essential for developing alternative approaches for managing
people with STIs by using rapid point-of-care diagnostic tests.
13. SURVEILLANCE AND RESEARCH NEEDS
85
13. Surveillance and research needs
•	For syphilis, since there is routine maternal screening and trend estimation at the country
level, modelling should be used more systematically and frequently to establish maternal
syphilis trend estimates, together with the WHO congenital syphilis estimation tool to
estimate the incidence of congenital syphilis as a basis for validating the elimination of
mother-to-child transmission. These elements can be strengthened and scaled up, linked
with STI workshops that are often conducted by UNAIDS for regional HIV estimation.
13.2 Research needs in STI case management
There are outstanding questions regarding the role of some organisms and their relevance and
need for strategic control that require more research. Some of the key ones are the following.
•	The role of overtreatment in developing or accelerating antimicrobial resistance, especially
for N. gonorrhoeae and M. genitalium.
•	M. genitalium: how important is this organism in pathogenicity and the need for control?
– The role and impact on sexual and reproductive health, and need for effective control, of
M. genitalium in urethritis among men, pelvic inflammatory disease among women and
proctitis among women and men.
– Research on best treatments for people with M. genitalium?
•	H. ducreyi: this pathogen seems to have been controlled, but it is occasionally detected in
some settings through infrequent etiological studies.
– What mechanisms should be put in place to keep vigilance to ensure that the infection
does not re-emerge, and if it does, how to detect it and prevent its spread?
– What is the most feasible way of determining whether H. ducreyi has been eliminated?
•	C. trachomatis genovar L1–L3: there seems to be a resurgence of lymphogranuloma
venereum, especially among men who have sex with men, causing rectal infections.
– Are there specific clinical manifestations that should alert the health-care provider to this
infection?
– What is the burden of this infection among men who have sex with men and people
engaging in anal sex?
– What are the long-term consequences of lymphogranuloma venereum if not treated?
– How can the diagnosis of lymphogranuloma venereum be made more affordable and
improved?
•	Validation studies and cost–effectiveness studies of the various recommended flow charts,
considering important outcomes, such as pelvic inflammatory disease and the development
of antimicrobial resistance.
•	Studies on the prevalence and effective treatment of people with anorectal and pharyngeal
infections and the role of pooled sampling.
Overall, real rapid low-cost point-of-care tests for diagnosing N. gonorrhoeae and
C. trachomatis need to be developed.
86
1.	 Rowley J, Vander Hoorn S, Korenromp E, Low N, Unemo M, Abu-Raddad LJ et al.
Chlamydia, gonorrhoea, trichomoniasis and syphilis: global prevalence and incidence
estimates, 2016. Bull World Health Organ, 2019;97:548–562.
2.	 Korenromp EL, Rowley J, Alonso M, Mello MB, Wijesooriya NS, Mahiané SG et al. Global
burden of maternal and congenital syphilis and associated adverse birth outcomes –
estimates for 2016 and progress since 2012. PLoS One. 2019;14:e0211720.
3.	 Wijesooriya NS, Rochat RW, Kamb ML, Turlapati P, Temmerman M, Broutet N et al. Global
burden of maternal and congenital syphilis in 2008 and 2012: a health systems modelling
study. Lancet Global Health. 2016;4:e525–33.
4.	 De Sanjosé S, Diaz M, Castellsagué X, Clifford G, Bruni L, Muñoz N et al. Worldwide
prevalence and genotype distribution of cervical human papillomavirus DNA in women
with normal cytology: a meta-analysis. Lancet Infect Dis. 2007;7:453–9.
5.	 Murray CJ, Vos T, Lozano R, Naghavi M, Flaxman AD, Michaud C et al. Disability-adjusted
life years (DALYs) for 291 diseases and injuries in 21 regions, 1990–2010: a systematic
analysis for the Global Burden of Disease Study 2010. Lancet. 2012;380:2197–223.
6.	 Decker M, Miller E, McCauley H, Tancredi D, Levenson R, Waldman J et al. Intimate partner
violence and partner notification of sexually transmitted infections among adolescent and
young adult family planning clinic patients. Int J STD AIDS. 2011;22:345–7.
7.	 Wasserheit JN. Epidemiological synergy: interrelationships between human
immunodeficiency virus infections and other sexually transmitted diseases. Sex Transm Dis.
1992;19:61–77.
8.	 Sexton J, Garnett G, Røttingen J-A. Metaanalysis and metaregression in interpreting study
variability in the impact of sexually transmitted diseases on susceptibility to HIV infection.
Sex Transm Dis. 2005;32:351–7.
9.	 Glynn JR, Biraro S, Weiss HA. Herpes simplex virus type 2: a key role in HIV incidence.
AIDS. 2009;23:1595–8.
10.	 Johnson LF, Lewis DA. The effect of genital tract infections on HIV-1 shedding in the
genital tract: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Sex Trans Dis. 2008;35:946–59.
11.	 Cohen MS. Classical sexually transmitted diseases drive the spread of HIV-1: back to the
future. J Infect Dis. 2012;206:1–2.
12.	 Jenness SM, Weiss KM, Goodreau SM, Gift T, Chesson H, Hoover KW et al. Incidence
of gonorrhea and chlamydia following human immunodeficiency virus preexposure
prophylaxis among men who have sex with men: a modeling study. Clin Infect Dis.
2017;65:712–8.
13.	 Prevention and control of sexually transmitted infections (STIs) in the era of oral pre-
exposure prophylaxis (PrEP) for HIV: technical brief. Geneva; World Health Organization;
2018 (https://www.who.int/hiv/pub/prep/prevention-sti-prep/en, accessed 22 March 2021).
14. Defining sexual health. Report of a technical consultation on sexual health, 28–31
January 2002, Geneva. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2006 (https://www.who.int/
reproductivehealth/publications/sexual_health/defining_sh/en, accessed 22 March 2021).
REFERENCES
87
References
15.	 Global health sector strategy on sexually transmitted infections, 2016–2021. Geneva:
World Health Organization; 2016 (https://www.who.int/publications/i/item/WHO-
RHR-16.09, accessed 22 March 2021).
16.	 Wi TE, Ndowa FJ, Ferreyra C, Kelly-Cirino C, Taylor MM, Toskin I et al. Diagnosing sexually
transmitted infections in resource-constrained settings: challenges and ways forward. J Int
AIDS Soc. 2019;22 (Suppl. 6):e25343.
17.	 Wi T, Lahra MM, Ndowa F, Bala M, Dillon J-AR, Ramon-Pardo P, et al. Antimicrobial
resistance in Neisseria gonorrhoeae: global surveillance and a call for international
collaborative action. PLoS Med. 2017;14:e1002344.
18.	 Unemo M, Golparian D, Eyre DW. Antimicrobial resistance in Neisseria gonorrhoeae and
treatment of gonorrhea. Methods Mol Biol. 2019;1997:37–58.
19.	 Unemo M, Lahra MM, Cole M, Galarza P, Ndowa F, Martin I et al. World Health
Organization Global Gonococcal Antimicrobial Surveillance Program (WHO GASP): review
of new data and evidence to inform international collaborative actions and research
efforts. Sex Health. 2019;16:412–25.
20.	 Ndowa FJ, Ison CA, Lusti-Narasimhan M. Gonococcal antimicrobial resistance: the
implications for public health control. Sex Transm Infect. 2013;89(Suppl. 4):iv1–2.
21.	 Horner PJ. Azithromycin antimicrobial resistance and genital Chlamydia trachomatis
infection: duration of therapy may be the key to improving efficacy. Sex Transm Infect.
2012;88:154–6.
22.	 Wang S, John Papp , Stamm W, Peeling R, Martin D, Holmes K. Evaluation of antimicrobial
resistance and treatment failures for Chlamydia trachomatis: a meeting report. Journal of
Infectious Diseases, 2005, 191:917–23.
23.	 WHO handbook for guideline development, 2nd ed. Geneva: World Health Organization;
2014 (https://apps.who.int/iris/handle/10665/145714, accessed 22 March 2021).
24.	 WHO guidelines for the treatment of Neisseria gonorrhoeae. Geneva: World Health
Organization; 2016 (https://www.who.int/publications/i/item/who-guidelines-for-the-
treatment-of-neisseria-gonorrhoeae, accessed 22 March 2021).
25.	 WHO guidelines for the treatment of Chlamydia trachomatis. Geneva: World Health
Organization; 2016 (https://www.who.int/publications/i/item/who-guidelines-for-the-
treatment-of-chlamydia-trachomatis, accessed 22 March 2021).
26.	 WHO guidelines for the treatment of Treponema pallidum (syphilis). Geneva: World Health
Organization; 2016 (https://www.who.int/publications/i/item/who-guidelines-for-the-
treatment-of-treponema-pallidum-(syphilis), accessed 22 March 2021).
27.	 WHO guidelines for the treatment of genital herpes simplex virus. Geneva: World Health
Organization; 2016 (https://www.who.int/publications/i/item/978924154987, accessed 22
March 2021).
28.	 WHO guidelines on syphilis screening and treatment for pregnant women. Geneva: World
Health Organization; 2016 (https://www.who.int/publications/i/item/9789241550093,
accessed 22 March 2021).
29.	 UNAIDS, WHO. Sexually transmitted diseases: policies and principles for prevention and
care. Geneva: UNAIDS; 1999 (https://data.unaids.org/publications/irc-pub04/una97-6_
en.pdf, accessed 22 March 2021).
88
Guidelines for the management of symptomatic sexually transmitted infections
30.	 Hawkes S, Morison L, Foster S, Gausia K, Chakraborty J, Peeling RW et al. Reproductive
tract infections in women in low-income, low-prevalence situations: assessment of
syndromic management in Matlab, Bangladesh. Lancet. 1999;354:1776–81.
31.	 Wasserheit JN, Harris JR, Chakraborty J, Kay BA, Mason KJ. Reproductive tract infections
in a family planning population in rural Bangladesh. Stud Fam Planning. 1989;20:69–80.
32.	 Balamurugan SS, Bendigeri N D. Community-based study of reproductive tract infections
among women of the reproductive age group in the urban health training centre area in
Hubli, Karnataka. Indian J Community Med. 2012;37:34–8.
33.	 Nandan D, Gupta YP, Krishnan V, Sharma A, Misra SK. Reproductive tract infection in
women of reproductive age group in Sitapur/Shahjahanpur District of Uttar Pradesh. Indian
J Public Health. 2001;45:8–13.
34.	 Htun Y, Morse SA, Dangor Y, Fehler G, Radebe F, Trees DL et al. Comparison of clinically
directed disease specific, and syndromic protocols for the management of genital ulcer
disease in Lesotho. Sex Transm Infect. 1998;74(Suppl. 1):S23–8.
35.	 Dangor Y, Ballard RC, Exposto L, Filomena DA, Fehler G, Miller SD et al. Accuracy of
clinical diagnosis of genital ulcer disease. Sex Trans Dis. 1990;17:184–9.
36.	 Richard P. DiCarlo, & Martin, D. The clinical diagnosis of genital ulcer disease in men. Clin
Infect Dis. 1997;25:292–8.
37.	 Brief sexuality-related communication: recommendations for a public health approach.
Geneva: World Health Organization; 2015 (https://www.who.int/publications/i/
item/9789241549004, accessed 22 March 2021).
38.	 Peeling RW. Applying new technologies for diagnosing sexually transmitted infections in
resource-poor settings. Sex Transm Infect. 2011;87:ii28–30.
39.	 Benzaken AS, Galban EG, Antunes W, Dutra JC, Peeling RW, Mabey D, Salama A.
Diagnosis of gonococcal infection in high risk women using a rapid test. Sex Transm Infect.
2006;82(Suppl. 5):v26–8.
40.	 Alary M, Gbenafa-Agossa C, Aïna G, Ndour M, Labbé AC, Fortin D et al. Evaluation of
a rapid point-of-care test for the detection of gonococcal infection among female sex
workers in Benin. Sex Transm Infect. 2006;82(Suppl. 5):v29–32.
41.	 Gift TL, Pate MS, Hook EW 3rd, Kassler WJ. The rapid test paradox: when fewer
cases detected lead to more cases treated: a decision analysis of tests for Chlamydia
trachomatis. Sex Transm Dis. 1999;26:232–40.
42.	 Gaydos C, Hardick J. Point of care diagnostics for sexually transmitted infections:
perspectives and advances. Expert Rev Antiinfect Ther. 2014;12:657–72.
43.	 Cristillo AD, Bristow CC, Peeling R, Van Der Pol B, de Cortina SH, Dimov IK, et.al. Point-
of-care sexually transmitted infection diagnostics: proceedings of the STAR sexually
transmitted Infection – clinical trial group programmatic meeting. Sex Transm Dis.
2017;44:211–8.
44.	 Herbst de Cortina S, Bristow CC, Davey JD, Klausner JD. A systematic review of point of
care testing for Chlamydia trachomatis, Neisseria gonorrhoeae, and Trichomonas vaginalis.
Infect Dis Obstet Gyncol. 2016;2016:4386127-17.
45.	 Jafari Y, Peeling R, Shivkumar S, Claessens C, Joseph L, Pai N. Are Treponema pallidum
specific rapid and point-of-care tests for syphilis accurate enough for screening in resource
limited settings? Evidence from a meta-analysis. PLoS One. 2013;8:e54695.
89
References
46.	 Gliddon H, Peeling R, Kamb M, Toskin I, Wi T, Taylor M. A systematic review and meta-
analysis of studies evaluating the performance and operational characteristics of dual
point-of-care tests for HIV and syphilis. Sex Transm Infect. 2017;93(Suppl. 4):S3–15.
47.	 Laboratory Quality Stepwise Implementation Tool. Lyon. World Health Organization; 2005
(https://www.who.int/ihr/lyon/hls_lqsi/en, accessed 22 March 2021).
48.	 Unemo M, Ballard R, Ison C, Lewis D, Ndowa F, Peeling R, editors. Laboratory diagnosis of
sexually transmitted infections including human immunodeficiency virus. Geneva: World Health
Organization; 2016 (https://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/handle/10665/85343/9789241505840_
eng.pdf;jsessionid=9CC5FDF5142E1760B4E9306CD7490102?sequence=1, accessed 22 March
2021).
49.	 Mindel A, Dallabetta G, Gerbase A, Holmes K, ed. Syndromic approach to STD
management. Sex Transm Infect. 1998;74(4):Suppl. 1.
50.	 Kingston MA, Bansal D, Carlin EM. “Shelf life” of Trichomonas vaginalis. Int J STD AIDS.
2003;14:28–9.
51.	 Willems H, Ahmed SS, Liu J, Xu Z, Peters BM. Vulvovaginal candidiasis: a current
understanding and burning questions. J Fungi. 2020;6:27.
52.	 Marrazzo J, Sobel J, Hillier S. Vaginal infections. In: Morse SA, Ballard RC, Holmes KK,
Moreland AA, eds. Atlas of sexually transmitted diseases and AIDS. 4th ed. Philadelphia:
Saunders, 2010:76–93.
53.	 Achkar JM, Fries BC. Candida infections of the genitourinary tract. Clin Microbiol Rev.
2010;23:253–73.
54.	 Paavonen J and Brunham RC. Bacterial vaginosis and desquamative inflammatory vaginitis.
N Engl J Med. 2018;379:2246–54.
55.	 Cohen CR, Lingappa JR, Baeten JM, Ngayo MO, Spiegel CA, Hong T et al. Bacterial
vaginosis associated with increased risk of female-to-male HIV-1 transmission: a
prospective cohort analysis among African couples. PLoS Med. 2012;9:e1001251.
56.	 Haahr T, Zacho J, Brauner M, Shathmigha K, Skov Jensen J, Humaidan P. Reproductive
outcome of patients undergoing in vitro fertilisation treatment and diagnosed with
bacterial vaginosis or abnormal vaginal microbiota: systematic PRISMA review and meta-
analysis. Int J Obstet Gynaecol. 2019;126:200–7.
57.	 Kapiga S, Kelly C, Weiss S, Daley T, Peterson L, Leburg C, Ramjee G. Risk factors for
incidence of sexually transmitted infections among women in South Africa, Tanzania, and
Zambia: results from HPTN 055 study. Sex Transm Dis. 2009;36:199–206.
58.	 Ghanem M, Radcliffe K, Allan P. The role of urethral samples in the diagnosis of
gonorrhoea in women. Int J STD AIDS. 2004;15:45–7.
59.	 Unemo M, Papp JR. Infections caused by Chlamydia trachomatis. In: Morse SA, Ballard RC,
Holmes KK, Moreland AA, eds. Atlas of sexually transmitted diseases and AIDS. 4th ed.
Philadelphia: Saunders; 2010:40–63.
60.	 Muralidhar S, Talwar R, Anil Kumar D, Kumar J, Bala M, Khan N, Ramesh V. Genital ulcer
disease: how worrisome is it today? A status report from New Delhi, India. J Sex Transm
Dis. 2013;2013:203636.
61.	 Magdaleno-Tapial J, Hernández-Bel P, Valenzuela-Oñate C, Ortiz-Salvador JM, García-
Legaz-Martínez M, Martínez-Domenech Á et al. Genital infection with herpes simplex
virus type 1 and type 2 in Valencia, Spain: a retrospective observational study. Actas
Dermosifiliogr. 2020;111:53–8.
90
Guidelines for the management of symptomatic sexually transmitted infections
62.	 Johnston C, Ashley Morrow R, Moreland A, Wald A. Genital herpes. In: Morse SA, Ballard
RC, Holmes KK, Moreland AA, eds. Atlas of sexually transmitted diseases and AIDS. 4th
ed. Philadelphia: Saunders, 2010:169–85.
63.	 Gjestland T. The Oslo study of untreated syphilis; an epidemiologic investigation of the
natural course of the syphilitic infection based upon a re-study of the Boeck-Bruusgaard
material. Acta Derm Venereol Suppl (Stockh). 1955;35(Suppl. 34):3–368.
64.	 Cox D, Ballard RC. Syphilis. In: Morse SA, Ballard RC, Holmes KK, Moreland AA, eds. Atlas
of sexually transmitted diseases and AIDS. 4th ed. Philadelphia: Saunders; 2010:111–40.
65.	 Lewis DA. Diagnostic tests for chancroid. Sex Transm Infect. 2000;76:137–41.
66.	 Raffe S, Soni S. Diagnostic tests for sexually transmitted infections. Medicine.
2018;46:277–82.
67.	 Mungati M, Machiha A, Mugurungi O, Tshimanga M, Kilmarx PH, Nyakura J et al. The
etiology of genital ulcer disease and coinfections with Chlamydia trachomatis and
Neisseria gonorrhoeae in Zimbabwe: results from the Zimbabwe STI etiology study. Sex
Transm Dis. 2018;45:61–8.
68.	 Prabhakar P, Narayanan P, Deshpande GR, Das A, Neilsen G, Mehendale S et al. Genital
ulcer disease in India: etiologies and performance of current syndrome guidelines. Sex
Transm Dis. 2012;39:906–10.
69.	 Looker KJ, Elmes JAR, Gottlieb SL, Schiffer JT, Vickerman P, Turner KME et al. Effect of
HSV-2 infection on subsequent HIV acquisition: an updated systematic review and meta-
analysis. Lancet Infect Dis. 2017;17:1303–16.
70.	 Minichiello V, Scott J, Callander D. A new public health context to understand male sex
work. BMC Public Health. 2015;15:282.
71.	 Muraguri N, Tun W, Okal J, Broz D, Raymond HF, Kellogg T et al. HIV and STI prevalence
and risk factors among male sex workers and other men who have sex with men in
Nairobi, Kenya. J Acquir Immune Defic Syndr. 2015;68:91–6.
72.	 Van Gerwen OT, Jani A, Long DM, Austin EL, Musgrove K, Muzny CA. Prevalence of
sexually transmitted infections and human immunodeficiency virus in transgender persons:
a systematic review. Transgender Health. 2020;5:90–103.
73.	 Yared N, Horvath K, Fashanu O, Zhao R, Baker J, Kulasingam S. Optimizing screening for
sexually transmitted infections in men using self-collected swabs – a systematic review.
Sex Transm Dis. 2018;45:294–300.
91
STI Guideline Development
Group
Ilya Abellanosa-Tacan
STI Physician
Social Hygiene Clinic
Cebu City
Philippines
Laith Abu-Raddad
Professor of Biostatistics, Epidemiology and
Biomathematics Research Core
Department of Public Health
Weill Cornell Medical College – Qatar
Cornell University Education City
Doha
Qatar
Yaw Adu-Sarkodie
School of Medical Sciences
Kwame Nkrumah University of Science and
Technology
Bantama Kumasi
Ghana
Chris Akolo
Deputy Director
Technical, Linkages Project
FHI 360
Washington, DC
USA
Andrew Amato
European Centre for Disease Prevention and
Control
Stockholm
Sweden
Mircea Betiu
Nicolae Testemițanu State University of
Medicine and Pharmacy
Chișinău
Republic of Moldova
John Changalucha
National Institute for Medical Research
Mwanza Medical Research Centre
Mwanza
United Republic of Tanzania
Rizwana Chaudhri
Obstetrics and Gynecology Department
Islamabad Specialists Clinic
Islamabad
Pakistan
Xiang-Sheng Chen
Deputy Director
National Center for STD Control
Chinese CDC and Chinese Academy of
Medical Sciences
Institute of Dermatology
Nanjing
China
Amina El Kettani
Direction de l’Epidémiologie
Service des MST-sida
Ministry of Health
Rabat
Morocco
Patricia Garcia
Dean, School of Public Health and
Administration
Universidad Peruana Cayetano Heredia
Lima
Peru
William M. Geisler
Clinical Associate Director and Medical
Scientist
Training Program
Professor of Medicine, Division of Infectious
Diseases
University of Alabama at Birmingham
Birmingham, AL
USA
ANNEX 1. STI GUIDELINE
DEVELOPMENT GROUP
92
Guidelines for the management of symptomatic sexually transmitted infections
Edward W. Hook III
Director, UAB Division of Infectious Diseases
University of Alabama at Birmingham
Birmingham, AL
USA
Rossaphorn Kittyaowamarn
Department of Diseases Control
Bureau of AIDS, TB and STIs, Thailand
Ministry of Public Health
Nonthaburi
Thailand
Jeffrey D. Klausner
Professor of Medicine and Public Health
UCLA David Geffen School of Medicine and
Fielding School of Public Health
Los Angeles, CA
USA
Ranmini Kularatne
Head, STI Section
Centre for HIV & STIs
National Institute for Communicable Diseases
Johannesburg, South Africa
David Lewis
Western Sydney Sexual Health Centre
Marie Bashir Institute for Infectious Diseases
and Biosecurity
Sydney Medical School
University of Sydney
Sydney, Australia
Nicola Low
Epidemiology and Public Health
Institute of Social and Preventive Medicine
University of Berne
Berne
Switzerland
Philippe Mayaud
Clinical Research Department
Faculty of Infectious and Tropical Diseases
London School of Hygiene and Tropical
Medicine
London
United Kingdom
Daniel McCartney
Research and Technical Support
International Planned Parenthood Federation
London
United Kingdom
Nelly Mugo
Kenya Medical Research Institute
Nairobi
Kenya
Saiqa Mullick
Director, Implementation Science
Wits Reproductive Health and HIV Institute
Johannesburg
South Africa
Francis Ndowa
Harare
Zimbabwe
Kees Rietmeijer
Medical Director
Denver STD Prevention Training Center
Denver Public Health Department
Denver, CO
USA
Pachara Sirivongrangson
Senior Advisor and Programme Manager
Department of Diseases Control
Bureau of AIDS, TB and STIs, Thailand
Ministry of Public Health
Nonthaburi
Thailand
Katayoun Tayeri
HIV&AIDS specialist
Iranian Research Center of HIV&AIDS
Iranian Institute for Reduction of High Risk
Behaviors
Tehran University of Medical Sciences
National HIV/AIDS Care & Treatment Adviser
Ministry of Health
Tehran
Islamic Republic of Iran
Ann Natalia Umar
National STI Program Manager
HIV AIDS and STI, Subdirectorate
Ministry of Health
Indonesia
Magnus Unemo
Department of Laboratory Medicine
Microbiology
Örebro University Hospital
Örebro
Sweden
93
Annex 1. STI Guideline Development Group
Noor Mohamed Usman
STI Physician
Chennai
India
Bea Vuylsteke
Institute of Tropical Medicine
Antwerp
Belgium
Judith Wasserheit
Professor of Global Health and Medicine
Department of Global Health
Adjunct Professor of Epidemiology
University of Washington
Seattle, WA
USA
Observers
Laura Bachmann
Division of Sexually Transmitted Diseases
Prevention
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
Atlanta, GA
USA
Cecilia Ferreyra
Medical Officer
Antimicrobial Resistance
FIND
Geneva
Switzerland
Fernando Pascual Martinez
Senior Access Manager
Global AMR Research and Development
Partnership Foundation
Geneva
Switzerland
Tim Sladden
Senior Adviser
Sexual & Reproductive Health Branch
UNFPA
New York, NY
USA
External Review Group
Anupong Chitwarakorn
NGO clinic physician
Silom Clinic
Thailand
H.J.C. de Vries
Amsterdam Sexual Health Clinics
Amsterdam
Netherlands
Hans Benjamin Hampel
University Hospital Zurich
Department of Infectious Diseases and
Hospital Epidemiology
University of Zurich
Epidemiology, Biostatistics and Prevention
Institute
Zurich
Swtierland
Kausar Jabeen
Aga Khan Foundation
Pakistan
Monica Lahra
Division of Bacteriology
WHO Collaborating Centre for Sexually
Transmitted Infections and Antimicrobial
Resistance
Department of Microbiology
Prince of Wales Hospital
New South Wales
Australia
Ahmed Latif
Public Health Consultant
Northern Territory
Australia
Ioannis Mameletzis
Consultant, Key Populations
Ukraine and Sri Lanka
Angelica Espinosa Miranda
Ministry of Health
STI, AIDS and Viral Hepatitis Department
Brazil
94
Guidelines for the management of symptomatic sexually transmitted infections
Koleka Mlisana
Head of Medical Microbiology
University of KwaZulu-Natal
Durban
South Africa
Lori Newman
National Institute of Allergy and Infectious
Diseases
Department of Health and Human Services
National Institutes of Health
Washington, DC
USA
Catherine Ngugui
Head, National AIDS and STI Control
Programme
Ministry of Health
Kenya
Lilani Rajapaksa
Consultant Venereologist
Coordinator, HIV Care Services, Elimination
of Mother-to-child Transmission of HIV and
Syphilis Programme
National STD AIDS Control Programme
Sri Lanka
Reshmie Ramautarsing
Physician
Thai Red Cross AIDS Research Centre
Bangkok
Thailand
Danvic Rosadiño
Senior Operations Manager and Data
Protection Officer
LoveYourself, Inc.
Mandaluyong City
Philippines
Janet Wilson
President
International Union of STIs
Consultant in Genitourinary Medicine and
HIV
Leeds Teaching Hospitals NHS Trust
Leeds General Infirmary
Leeds
United Kingdom
WHO Steering Committee
(headquarters)
Ian Askew
Director
Department of Sexual and Reproductive
Health and Research
Theresa Babovic
Technical Officer
Department of Global HIV, Hepatitis and
Sexually Transmitted Infections Programmes
Rachel Baggaley
Coordinator, Testing, Prevention and
Populations
Department of Global HIV, Hepatitis and
Sexually Transmitted Infections Programmes
Nathalie Broutet
Medical Officer
Department of Sexual and Reproductive
Health and Research
Venkatraman Chandra-Mouli
Scientist
Department of Sexual and Reproductive
Health and Research
Meg Doherty
Director
Department of Global HIV, Hepatitis and
Sexually Transmitted Infections Programmes
Nathan Ford
Medical Officer
Department of Global HIV, Hepatitis and
Sexually Transmitted Infections Programmes
Sami Gottlieb
Medical Officer
Department of Sexual and Reproductive
Health and Research
Cadi Irvine
Consultant
Department of Global HIV, Hepatitis and
Sexually Transmitted Infections Programmes
James Kiarie
Department of Sexual and Reproductive
Health and Research
Niklas Luhmann
Technical Officer
Department of Global HIV, Hepatitis and
Sexually Transmitted Infections Programmes
95
Annex 1. STI Guideline Development Group
Virginia MacDonald
Technical Officer
Department of Global HIV, Hepatitis and
Sexually Transmitted Infections Programmes
Francis McConville
Technical Officer
Department for Maternal, Newborn, Child
and Adolescent Health and Ageing
Yamuna Mundade
Programme Manager
Department of Global HIV, Hepatitis and
Sexually Transmitted Infections Programmes
Carmem Pessoa-Silva
Unit Head
Surveillance, Evidence & Laboratory
Strengthening
Ajay Rangaraj
Technical Officer
Department of Global HIV, Hepatitis and
Sexually Transmitted Infections Programmes
Melanie Taylor
Medical Officer
Department of Global HIV, Hepatitis and
Sexually Transmitted Infections Programmes
Igor Toskin
Scientist
Department of Sexual and Reproductive
Health and Research
Annette Vester
Technical Officer
Department of Global HIV, Hepatitis and
Sexually Transmitted Infections Programmes
Marco Vitoria
Medical Officer
Department of Global HIV, Hepatitis and
Sexually Transmitted Infections Programmes
Lara Vojnov
Technical Officer
Department of Global HIV, Hepatitis and
Sexually Transmitted Infections Programmes
Teodora Wia
Medical Officer STI
Department of Global HIV, Hepatitis and
Sexually Transmitted Infections Programmes
Mayada Youseff-Fox
Technical Officer
Department of Global HIV, Hepatitis and
Sexually Transmitted Infections Programmes
WHO Steering Committee
(regional offices)
Massimo Ghidinelli
Unit Chief
HIV, Hepatitis, TB and Sexually Transmitted
Diseases
WHO Regional Office for the Americas
Joumana Hermez
Regional Adviser
Hepatitis, AIDS & STDs Sexually Transmitted
Diseases
WHO Regional Office for the Eastern
Mediterranean
Naoko Ishikawa
Coordinator
HIV, Hepatitis and STI
WHO Regional Office for the Western Pacific
Hugues Lago
Coordinator
HIV/TB/Hepatitis/STI Programmes
Integrated Communicable and
Noncommunicable Diseases Cluster
WHO Regional Office for Africa
Bharat Rewari
Medical Officer, HIV/STI/Hepatitis
WHO Regional Office for South-East Asia
Nicole Seguy
Joint Tuberculosis, HIV/AIDS & Hepatitis
Programme
WHO Regional Office for Europe
Methodologist
Nancy Santesso, Department of Clinical
Epidemiology and Biostatistics
McMaster University
Hamilton, Ontario
Canada
aOverall coordinator of the STI guidelines.
96
Guidelines for the management of symptomatic sexually transmitted infections
Systematic Review Team
Angela Barbara, Tejan Baldeh, Meha Bhatt, Stephanie Duda, Laura Fullerton, Anila
Qasim, Rosa Stalteri, Matthew Ventresca and Holger Schünemann: McMaster University,
Michael G. DeGroote Cochrane, Centre, Hamilton, Ontario, Canada
Eric Chow and Jason Ong: Monash University, Melbourne, Australia
Modeller
Katy Turner, University of Bristol, United Kingdom
97
ANNEX 2. DECLARATIONS OF CONFLICTS
OF INTEREST
STI Guideline Development Group members
Name
1. Employment
and consulting
2. Research
support
3. Investment
interests
4. Intellectual
property
5. Public
statements and
positions
6. Tobacco
products
Conflicts and
management
plana
Ilya Abellanosa-Tacan (Cebu City,
Philippines)
0
0
0
0
0
0
Full participation
Laith Abu-Raddad (Weill Cornell
Medical College, Qatar)
0
0
0
0
0
0
Full participation
Yaw Adu-Sarkodie (Sax) (Kwame
Nkrumah University of Science and
Technology, Ghana)
0
0
0
0
0
0
Full participation
Chris Akolo (FHI 360, Washington,
DC, USA)
0
0
0
0
0
0
Full participation
Andrew Amato (European Centre for
Disease Prevention and Control)
0
0
0
0
0
0
Full participation
Mircea Betiu (Nicolae Testemițanu
State University of Medicine and
Pharmacy, Republic of Moldova)
0
0
0
0
0
0
Full participation
John Changalucha (National
Institute for Medical Research, United
Republic of Tanzania)
0
0
0
0
0
0
Full participation
Xiang-Sheng Chen (National Center
for STD Control of Chinese CDC and
Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences
Institute of Dermatology, Nanjing,
China)
0
0
0
0
0
0
Full participation
Amina El Kettani (Ministry of Health,
Morocco)
0
0
0
0
0
0
Full participation
Patricia Garcia (Ministry of Health,
Peru)
0
0
0
0
0
0
Full participation
98
Guidelines for the management of symptomatic sexually transmitted infections
Name
1. Employment
and consulting
2. Research support
3. Investment
interests
4. Intellectual
property
5. Public statements
and positions
6. Tobacco
products
Conflicts and
management plana
William M. Geisler (University of
Alabama, Birmingham, USA)
Ceased in 2018:
consulting and travel from
Hologic Inc, = US$ 9000;
from Roche = US$ 10,000
0
0
0
0
Declare. None
are active. Full
participation
Edward W. Hook III (University of
Alabama, Birmingham, USA)
Adviser to GARDP (Global
AMR Research and
Development Partnership,
not for profit organization
established by WHO and
DNDI) = US$ 12 000
0
0
0
0
0
Full participation
Rossaphorn Kittyaowamarn
(Ministry of Public Health, Thailand)
0
0
0
0
0
0
Full participation
Jeffrey D. Klausner (UCLA David
Geffen School of Medicine and Fielding
School of Public Health, Los Angeles,
CA, USA)
Scientific advisory board
participant, Danaher
Diagnostics, parent
company of Cepheid =
US$ 6000
United States National
Institutes of Health
R01 and R21 research
awards related to syphilis,
gonorrhoea, STIs in
pregnant women (US$ 5
million over multiple years)
0
0
0
0
Declare and
allowed partial
participation
Ranmini Kularatne (National
Institute for Communicable Diseases,
Johannesburg, South Africa)
0
0
0
0
0
0
Full participation
David Lewis (University of Sydney,
Australia)
AUD 780 from GSK
(attending a meeting)
0
0
0
0
0
Finance not
significant, full
participation.
Nicola Low (Institute of Social
and Preventive Medicine, Berne,
Switzerland)
0
0
0
0
0
0
Full participation
99
Annex 2. Declarations of conflicts of interest
Name
1. Employment
and consulting
2. Research support
3. Investment
interests
4. Intellectual
property
5. Public statements
and positions
6. Tobacco
products
Conflicts and
management plana
Philippe Mayaud (London School of
Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, United
Kingdom)
0
0
0
0
0
0
Full participation
Daniel McCartney (International
Planned Parenthood Federation, United
Kingdom)
0
0
0
0
0
0
Full participation
Nelly Mugo (Kenya Medical Research
Institute, Kenya)
0
0
0
0
0
0
Full participation
Saiqa Mullick (Population Council,
South Africa)
0
0
0
0
0
0
Full participation
Francis Ndowa (Harare, Zimbabwe)
0
0
0
0
0
0
Full participation
Kees Rietmeijer (Denver Public
Health Department, CO, USA)
0
0
0
0
0
0
Full participation
Pachara Sirivongrangson (Ministry
of Public Health, Thailand)
Consulting work for
GARDP = US$ 10 000
0
0
0
0
0
Full participation
Katayoun Tayeri (Ministry of Health,
Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran)
0
0
0
0
0
0
Full participation
Magnus Unemo (Örebro University
Hospital, Sweden)
0
0
0
0
0
0
Full participation
Noor Mohamed Usman (Chennai,
India)
0
0
0
0
0
0
Full participation
Ann Natalia Umar (Ministry of
Health, Indonesia)
0
0
0
0
0
0
Full participation
Bea Vuylsteke (Institute of Tropical
Medicine, Antwerp, Belgium)
0
0
0
0
0
0
Full participation
Judith Wasserheit (University of
Washington, USA)
0
0
0
0
0
0
Full participation
100
Guidelines for the management of symptomatic sexually transmitted infections
Name
1. Employment
and consulting
2. Research support
3. Investment
interests
4. Intellectual
property
5. Public statements
and positions
6. Tobacco
products
Conflicts and
management plana
Observers
Laura Bachmannn (United States
Centres for Disease Control snd
Prevention)
0
0
0
0
United States
Government
employee
0
Nil
Cecilia Ferreyra (FIND)
0
0
0
0
0
0
Nil
Tim Sladden (UNFPA)
0
0
0
0
0
0
Nil
aOf the financial declarations made, none was considered to be related to the subject matter of these guidelines since formulating recommendations related to the use of antiretroviral drugs was not within the
scope of these guidelines.
External Review Group members
Name
1. Employment
and consulting
2. Research support
3. Investment
interests
4. Intellectual
property
5. Public statements
and positions
6. Tobacco
products
Conflicts and
management plana
Anupong Chitwarakorn (Silom Clinic,
Thailand)
0
0
0
0
0
0
Full participation
H.J.C. de Vries (Amsterdam,
Netherlands)
0
0
0
0
0
0
Full participation
Hans Benjamin Hampel (University
of Zurich, Switzerland)
0
0
0
0
0
0
Full participation
Monica Lahra (New South Wales,
Australia)
0
0
0
0
0
0
Full participation
Ahmed Latif (Public Health
Consultant, Australia)
0
0
0
0
0
0
Full participation
Ioannis Mameletzis (Consultant,
Ukraine)
0
0
0
0
0
0
Full participation
101
Annex 2. Declarations of conflicts of interest
Name
1. Employment
and consulting
2. Research support
3. Investment
interests
4. Intellectual
property
5. Public statements
and positions
6. Tobacco
products
Conflicts and
management plana
Angelica Espinosa Miranda (Ministry
of Health, Brazil)
0
0
0
0
0
0
Full participation
Koleka Mlisana (University of
KwaZulu Natal, South Africa)
0
0
0
0
0
0
Full participation
Lori Newman (National Institutes of
Health, Washington DC, USA)
0
0
0
0
United States
Government
employee.
0
Full participation
Catherine Ngugui (Ministry of Health,
Kenya)
0
0
0
0
0
0
Full participation
Lilani Rajapaksa (National STD AIDS
Control Programme, Sri Lanka)
0
0
0
0
0
0
Full participation
Reshmie Ramautarsing (Bangkok,
Thailand)
0
0
0
0
0
0
Full participation
Danvic Rosadiño (Mandaluyong City,
Philippines)
0
0
0
0
0
0
Full participation
Janet Wilson (IUSTI, Leeds, United
Kingdom)
0
0
0
0
0
0
Full participation
102
ANNEX 3. EVIDENCE-TO-DECISION TABLE:
URETHRAL DISCHARGE
Should current WHO syndromic management be
recommended versus laboratory diagnosis, no treatment
or treat all to identify STIs among men with urethral
discharge or persistent or recurrent urethral discharge?
Population:
Men with urethral discharge
Intervention and comparator:
Current WHO syndromic approach versus
laboratory diagnosis (or no treatment or
treat all)
Purpose of the approach:
To identify men for treatment of STIs
Linked treatments:
Treatments for infections caused by N.
gonorrhoeae, C. trachomatis, T. vaginalis
and M. genitalium
Anticipated outcomes:
Number of people identified correctly
as having or not having STI; number of
people identified incorrectly as having
or not having STI; consequences of
appropriate or inappropriate treatment;
patient and provider acceptability,
feasibility, equity and resource use
Setting:
Outpatient
Perspective:
Population level
Subgroups:
High- or low-prevalence settings; settings
with limited versus established laboratory
capacity
Background:
Syndromic management refers to a
strategy for identifying and treating STIs
based on specific syndromes (symptoms
identified by a patient) and signs (clinically
observed signs of infection) associated
with clearly defined causes. Although
etiological diagnosis is preferred, it is not
always accessible or affordable.
Fig. A3.1 provides clinical guidelines
for the syndromic management of
urethral discharge and persistent or
recurrent urethral discharge in the 2003
WHO publication Guidelines for the
management of sexually transmitted
infections.
103
Annex 3. Evidence-to-decision table: urethral discharge
Assessment
Judgement
Research evidence
Problem
Is the problem a priority?
No
Probably no
Probably yes
Yes
Varies
Don’t know
STIs are important because of their magnitude, potential complications and
increased risk of HIV. STIs have health, social and economic consequences.
High cost of molecular STI testing
Molecular-based tests enable etiological diagnosis to guide appropriate
treatment if available but are expensive and not available in many settings.
Test accuracy
How accurate is the test?
Very inaccurate
Inaccurate
Accurate
Very accurate
Varies
Don’t know
We conducted a systematic review for the following.
Diagnostic accuracy of syndromic management for M. genitalium – no
studies found
Diagnostic accuracy of syndromic management for recurrent or persistent
urethral discharge – no studies found
Diagnostic accuracy of syndromic management for N. gonorrhoeae and/or
C. trachomatis
•	 Flow chart 1 (WHO algorithm 1) = history and risk assessment
•	 Flow chart 2 (WHO algorithm 2) = history, risk assessment and genital
examination (for example, milking urethra)
•	 Flow chart 3 (WHO algorithm 3) = history, risk assessment, genital
examination (for example, milking urethra), and urethral discharge samples
for Gram staining and microscopy
We found six studies (1570 participants) in the general population of men
(1–6). See Table A3.1.
Following are the sensitivity and specificity of the flow charts and a
hypothetical point-of-care test, and the molecular assay (GeneXpert) test.
The pooled accuracy data are of low certainty because of few events.
Table A3.1. GRADE summary of findings table
(see absolute effects for true and false
positives and negatives in Table A3.3)
Flow chart
Sensitivity
(%, 95% confidence
interval)
Specificity
(%, 95% confidence
interval)
Certainty
of evidence
1. History, risk
94.6 (91–97)
41.1 (32–51)
Low
2. History, risk,
examination
85.2 (80–89)
66.5 (62–71)
Low
3. History, risk,
examination,
microscopy
91.7 (88–94)
4.5
Low
4. Hypothetical
point-of-care
testing
80
90
–
5. GeneXpert®
95
98
High
104
Guidelines for the management of symptomatic sexually transmitted infections
Judgement
Research evidence
Desirable effects
How substantial are the
desirable anticipated
effects of syndromic
approach?
Trivial
Small
Moderate
Large
Varies
Don’t know
We conducted a systematic review of risk factors for N. gonorrhoeae and/or
C. trachomatis in men with urethral discharge. We found 62 studies that showed
that the odds of N. gonorrhoeae or C. trachomatis infection among men with
urethral discharge is 10 times the odds among men with no urethral discharge.
Table A3.2. Pooled risk of N. gonorrhoeae and/or
C. trachomatis by risk factor
Risk factor
Pooled adjusted
odds ratio (95%
confidence interval)
Pooled unadjusted
odds ratio (95%
confidence interval)
Overall
6.58 (1.76–24.51)
10.79 (4.40–26.43)
Any urethritis symptoms
–
9.40 (4.40–20.08)
Dysuria and/or urethral
discharge
–
12.99 (2.68–62.93)
Dysuria only
2.10 (1.40–3.15)
2.02 (1.34–3.05)
Urethral discharge only
9.73 (1.94–48.74)
15.00 (4.67–48.17)
Another systematic review analysed the association of M. genitalium among
men with persistent or recurrent urethral discharge and showed that the odds
of M. genitalium infection among men with persistent of recurrent urethritis
is 20 times the odds among men without persistent or recurrent urethral
discharge (Jensen, supplementary material).
Based on the sensitivity and specificity of the algorithms and tests, we
calculated true positive, false negative, true negative and false positive.
The following were identified as desirable effects and undesirable effects:
•	 potential consequences of true positive could include appropriate treatment,
cure, side-effects, partner notification, reduced transmission of STI and HIV,
resistance, couple difficulties, costs;
•	 potential consequences of true negative could include alternative diagnoses
possible, psychological benefit;
•	 potential consequences of false negative could include cure still possible,
persistent symptoms, complications, STI and/or HIV transmission, no
counselling, no partner notification; and
•	 potential consequences of false positive could include inappropriate
treatment, side-effects, antimicrobial resistance, couple difficulties, costs.
Undesirable effects
How substantial are the
undesirable anticipated
effects?
Large
Moderate
Small
Trivial
Varies
Don’t know
105
Annex 3. Evidence-to-decision table: urethral discharge
Judgement
Research evidence
Certainty of the evidence of test accuracy
What is the overall certainty
of the evidence of test
accuracy?
Very low
Low
Moderate
High
No included studies
Table A3.3. Absolute effects by true and false
positives and negatives based on the sensitivity
and specificity of syndromic approaches
Prevalence of Neisseria
gonorrhoeae or Chlamydia
trachomatis
10%
40%
60%
History and risk
True positive
10
38
57
False negative – missed treatment
0
2
3
True negative
37
25
16
False positive – unnecessary treatment
53
35
24
History, risk and examination
True positive
9
34
51
False negative – missed treatment
1
6
9
True negative
60
40
27
False positive – unnecessary treatment
30
20
13
History, risk, examination and microscopy
True positive
9
37
55
False negative – missed treatment
1
3
5
True negative
4
3
2
False positive – unnecessary treatment
86
57
38
Point-of-care testing (80% or 90%)
True positive
8
32
48
False negative – missed treatment
2
8
12
True negative
81
54
36
False positive – unnecessary treatment
9
6
4
GeneXpert® (95%, 98%)
True positive
10
38
57
False negative – missed treatment
0
2
3
True negative
88
59
39
False positive – unnecessary treatment
2
1
1
106
Guidelines for the management of symptomatic sexually transmitted infections
Judgement
Research evidence
Certainty of the evidence of
the effects of management
What is the overall
certainty of the
evidence of effects of
the management that is
guided by the test results?
Very low
Low
Moderate
High
No included studies
Certainty of effects
What is the overall
certainty of the evidence
of effects of the test?
Very low
Low
Moderate
High
No included studies
Values
Is there important
uncertainty about or
variability in how much
people value the main
outcomes?
Important uncertainty or
variability
Possibly important
uncertainty or variability
Probably no important
uncertainty or variability
No important uncertainty
or variability
The Guideline Development Group placed greater value on avoiding missed
cases despite possible unnecessary treatment for some cases.
Balance of effects
Does the balance
between desirable and
undesirable effects favour
the intervention or the
comparison?
Favours the comparison
Probably favours the
comparison
Does not favour either
the intervention or the
comparison
Probably favours the
intervention
Favours the intervention
Varies
Don’t know
The undesirable effects of a syndromic approach (such as missed cases) were
greater than treating all or treating according to molecular testing; and the
desirable effects (such as correct treatment) of a syndromic approach were
none to trivial compared with treating all or molecular testing.
Therefore, the balance of benefits and harm favoured using molecular testing
or treating all.
107
Annex 3. Evidence-to-decision table: urethral discharge
Judgement
Research evidence
Resources required
How large are the resource
requirements (costs)?
Large costs
Moderate costs
Negligible costs and savings
Moderate savings
Large savings
Varies
Don’t know
Therapy for all positives (N. gonorrhoeae or C. trachomatis) was 1000 mg
azithromycin + ceftriaxone 250 mg intramuscularly = US$ 1.66
Therapy for negatives was 1000 mg azithromycin = US$ 0.95
Costs of flow chart 1, 2 = US$ 0
Costs of flow chart 3 = US$ 1
Costs of point-of-care test = US$ 3
GeneXpert costs: US$ 16
Estimated costs of treatment for N. gonorrhoeae or C. trachomatis with
antimicrobial resistance: US$ 25
Certainty of evidence of
required resources
What is the certainty of
the evidence of resource
requirements (costs)?
Very low
Low
Moderate
High
No included studies
Cost–effectiveness
Does the cost–
effectiveness of the
intervention favour
the intervention or the
comparison?
Favours the comparison
Probably favours the
comparison
Does not favour either
the intervention or the
comparison
Probably favours the
intervention
Favours the intervention
Varies
No included studies
Basic modelling was conducted using the costs (of tests and treatments) and
accuracy of the management strategies.
History, risk assessment and examination (with or without microscopy) appear
to be lower (~US$ 2500 for 1000 men with urethral discharge) than the use
of low-cost point-of-care tests (~US$ 4000) or GenXpert (~US$ 17 000) at any
prevalence. Treating all with urethral discharge costs ~ US$ 1660, slightly more
than using history and risk assessment.
Therefore, with little difference in costs between treating all and syndromic
management, but no missed cases when treating all, cost–effectiveness
favoured treating all (the comparison).
Average cost for a correct treatment was US$ 3.86 for a syndromic approach
compared with US$ 32.83 for an etiological approach (4).
Average cost for a correct treatment was US$ 3.15 for a syndromic approach
compared with US$ 323.48 for an etiological approach (3).
Equity
What would be the impact
on health equity?
Reduced
Probably reduced
Probably no impact
Probably increased
Increased
Varies
Don’t know
108
Guidelines for the management of symptomatic sexually transmitted infections
Judgement
Research evidence
Acceptability
Is the intervention
acceptable to key
stakeholders?
No
Probably no
Probably yes
Yes
Varies
Don’t know
By men (8,9):
The syndromic approach is acceptable by men with urethral discharge; staff
were competent; better care than by healers; felt treated with respect.
83% of patients in the United Republic of Tanzania reporting satisfaction with
STI services that use syndromic management (9).
The STI Guideline Development Group also commented that patients would
prefer immediate relief of symptoms rather than waiting for the results.
By clinicians (8,10–12):
Variability in implementation of syndromic approach from 20% to 70%
receiving correct treatment; may not apply the approach as they are uncertain
about efficacy.
Feasibility
Is the intervention feasible
to implement?
No
Probably no
Probably yes
Yes
Varies
Don’t know
A review found nine studies addressing feasibility (7,12–19):
Men may delay seeking care for urethral discharge due to unawareness,
knowledge or beliefs, disappointment in health care or when female
practitioners provide care.
About half of the clinicians in some countries do not know how to treat
urethral discharge according to the guidelines.
Training was found to increase awareness and knowledge about treatment.
109
Annex 3. Evidence-to-decision table: urethral discharge
Summary of judgements
Judgement
Problem
No
Probably no
Probably
yes
Yes
Varies
Don’t know
Test accuracy
Very
inaccurate
Inaccurate
Accurate
Very
accurate
Varies
Don’t know
Desirable
effects
Trivial
Small
Moderate
Large
Varies
Don’t know
Undesirable
effects
Large
Moderate
Small
Trivial
Varies
Don’t know
Certainty of
the evidence of
test accuracy
Very low
Low
Moderate
High
No included
studies
Certainty of
the evidence of
the effects of
management
Very low
Low
Moderate
High
No included
studies
Certainty of
effects
Very low
Low
Moderate
High
No included
studies
Values
Important
uncertainty
or
variability
Possibly
important
uncertainty
or
variability
Probably no
important
uncertainty
or
variability
No
important
uncertainty
or
variability
Balance of
effects
Favours the
comparison
Probably
favours the
comparison
Does not
favour
either the
intervention
or the
comparison
Probably
favours the
intervention
Favours the
intervention
Varies
Don’t know
Resources
required
Large costs
Moderate
costs
Negligible
costs and
savings
Moderate
savings
Large
savings
Varies
Don’t know
Certainty
of evidence
of required
resources
Very low
Low
Moderate
High
No included
studies
Cost–
effectiveness
Favours the
comparison
Probably
favours the
comparison
Does not
favour
either the
intervention
or the
comparison
Probably
favours the
intervention
Favours the
intervention
Varies
No included
studies
Equity
Reduced
Probably
reduced
Probably no
impact
Probably
increased
Increased
Varies
Don’t know
Acceptability
No
Probably no
Probably
yes
Yes
Varies
Don’t know
Feasibility
No
Probably no
Probably
yes
Yes
Varies
Don’t know
110
Guidelines for the management of symptomatic sexually transmitted infections
Conclusions
Should current WHO syndromic management be recommended versus laboratory
diagnosis, no treatment or treat all to identify STIs among men with urethral
discharge or persistent or recurrent urethral discharge?
Type of
recommendation
Strong
recommendation
against the
intervention
Conditional
recommendation
against the
intervention
Conditional
recommendation for
either the intervention
or the comparison
Conditional
recommendation
for the
intervention
Strong
recommendation
for the intervention
Recommendation
Recommendations for the management of urethral discharge
For people with symptom of urethral discharge from the penis, management is recommended to be based
on the results of quality-assured molecular assays. However, in settings with limited or no molecular tests
or laboratory capacity, we recommend syndromic treatment to ensure treatment on the same day of visit.
Good practice includes:
•	 taking a medical and sexual history and assessing the risk of STIs;
•	 performing a physical examination of the genital and anal areas; and
•	 offering HIV and syphilis testing and other preventive services as recommended in other guidelines.
Settings with quality-assured molecular testing in a laboratory with a fully operational quality
management system and results available on the same day of the visit.
We recommend the following.
1.	 Perform molecular assays such as nucleic-acid amplification test (NAAT) to confirm or exclude
Neisseria gonorrhoeae and Chlamydia trachomatis.
2.	 Treat according to the test results on the same day. If urethral discharge is present but tests are
negative, treat for non-gonococcal and non-chlamydial urethritis (such as Mycoplasma genitalium
or Trichomonas vaginalis).
3.	 When treatment based on molecular assays is not feasible on the same day of the visit, we
recommend syndromic treatment of infection with N. gonorrhoeae and C. trachomatis and use the
test results to support managing the partner when tests are available.
4.	 Treat people with recurrent or persistent urethral discharge based on a repeat molecular assay
(such as NAAT) after 21 days, testing for N. gonorrhoeae, C. trachomatis as well as M. genitalium
and T. vaginalis and test for antimicrobial-resistant N. gonorrhoeae.
Settings in which same-day treatment is not feasible with molecular testing or with limited or no
molecular testing.
We suggest the following.
1.	 Treat people who have urethral discharge confirmed on examination for N. gonorrhoeae and
C. trachomatis to ensure same-day treatment.
2.	 Treat people with recurrent or persistent urethral discharge for treatment failure based on WHO
guidelines and review.
Good practice includes:
•	 if symptoms persist at review, checking partner notification and treatment history; and
•	 for people with recurrent or persistent urethral discharge, referring people to a centre with
laboratory capacity to diagnose N. gonorrhoeae, C. trachomatis, M. genitalium and T. vaginalis
and to test for antimicrobial-resistant N. gonorrhoeae and M. genitalium.
Justification
•	 Adding microscopy did not improve the sensitivity and specificity of the flow chart.
•	 Studies show variability in the implementation of syndromic approaches based on symptoms or
laboratory testing, and a simple management approach could lead to better implementation.
•	 Performing molecular assay tests for N. gonorrhoeae, C. trachomatis and T. vaginalis and/or
M. genitalium and basing treatment on these results leads to the most people treated correctly.
•	 In a population with 60% prevalence of N. gonorrhoeae and C. trachomatis among those with
urethral discharge, treating all for N. gonorrhoeae and C. trachomatis would mean that 40%
of people would be unnecessarily treated. The Guideline Development Group agreed that this
proportion is acceptable, as are higher proportions in lower-prevalence settings, because treating
all would ensure that people with N. gonorrhoeae and C. trachomatis are treated, thereby reducing
the chance of complications and further transmission.
111
Annex 3. Evidence-to-decision table: urethral discharge
Fig. A3.1. Current WHO syndromic approach to the management of
urethral discharge
Take history and examine
Milk urethra if necessary
Person with symptom of
urethral discharge or dysuria
Yes
Yes
TREAT FOR GONOCOCCAL
INFECTION AND CHLAMYDIA
TRACHOMATIS
• Educate and council
• Promote condom use and
provide condoms
• Offer HIV counselling and
testing if both facilities are
available
• Ask patient to return in 7
days if symptoms persist
Use appropriate
flowchart
• Educate and council
• Promote condom use and
provide condoms
• Offer HIV counselling and
testing if both facilities are
available
• Review if symptoms persist
No
No
Discharge confirmed?
Any other genital disease?
112
Guidelines for the management of symptomatic sexually transmitted infections
Fig. A3.2. Current WHO syndromic approach to the management of
persistent or recurrent urethral discharge
Take history and examine
Milk urethra if necessary
Person with symptom of persistent/recurrent
urethral discharge or dysuria
Yes
No
No
Yes
Use appropriate flowchart
Repeat urethral
discharge treatment
• Educate and council
• Promote condom use and
provide condoms
• Offer HIV counselling and
testing if both facilities are
available
TREAT FOR TRICHOMONAS VAGINALIS
• Educate and council
• Promote condom use and provide condoms
• Manage and treat partner
• Ask patient to return in 7 days if symptoms persist
• Educate and council
• Promote condom use
and provide condoms
• Offer HIV counselling
and testing if both
facilities are available
Refer
No
Yes
Yes
No
Discharge confirmed?
Improved?
Any other genital disease?
Does history confirm
re-infection or poor
compliance?
113
Annex 3. Evidence-to-decision table: urethral discharge
References
1.	 Bhavsar C, Patel RM, Marfatia Y. A study of 113 cases of genital ulcerative disease and
urethral discharge syndrome with validation of syndromic management of sexually
transmitted diseases. Indian J Sex Transm Dis AIDS. 2014;35:35–9.
2.	 Chandeying V, Skov S, Tabrizi SN, Kemapunmanus M, Garland S. Can a two-glass urine
test or leucocyte esterase test of first-void urine improve syndromic management of male
urethritis in southern Thailand? Int J STD AIDS. 2000;11:235–40.
3.	 Liu H, Jamison D, Li X, Ma E, Yin Y, Detels R. Is syndromic management better than the
current approach for treatment of STDs in China? Evaluation of the cost–effectiveness of
syndromic management for male STD patients. Sex Transm Dis. 2003;30:327–30.
4.	 Tsai CH, Lee TC, Chang HL, Tang LH, Chiang CC, Chen KT. The cost–effectiveness of
syndromic management for male sexually transmitted disease patients with urethral
discharge symptoms and genital ulcer disease in Taiwan. Sex Transm Infect. 2008;84:400–4.
5.	 Wang Q, Yang P, Zhong M, Wang G. Validation of diagnostic algorithms for syndromic
management of sexually transmitted diseases. Chin Med J (Engl). 2003;116:181–6.
6.	 Yu MC, Li LH, Lu TH, Tang LH, Tsai CH, Chen KT. Aetiology of sexually transmitted disease
(STD) and comparison of STD syndromes and aetiological diagnosis in Taipei, Taiwan. Clin
Microbiol Infect. 2005;11:914–8.
7.	 Leichliter JS, Paz-Bailey G, Friedman AL, Habel MA, Vezi A, Sello M et al. “Clinics aren’t
meant for men”: sexual health care access and seeking behaviours among men in Gauteng
province, South Africa. Sahara J. 2011;8:82–8.
8.	 Kohler PK, Marumo E, Jed SL, Mema G, Galagan S, Tapia K et al. A national evaluation
using standardised patient actors to assess STI services in public sector clinical sentinel
surveillance facilities in South Africa. Sex Transm Infect. 2017;93:247–52.
9.	 Grosskurth H, Mwijarubi E, Todd J, Rwakatare M, Orroth K, Mayaud P, et al. Operational
performance of an STD control programme in Mwanza Region, Tanzania. Sexually
Transmitted Infections. 2000;76(6):426-36.
10.	 Khan AA, Khan A. Sexually transmitted infection care in Pakistan: the providers’
perspective. J Pak Med Assoc. 2012;62:941–5.
114
Guidelines for the management of symptomatic sexually transmitted infections
11.	 Iipinge SN, Pretorius L. The delivery and quality of sexually transmitted infections
treatment by private general practitioners in Windhoek Namibia. Glob J Health Sci.
2012;4:156–71.
12.	 Weaver MR, Pillay E, Jed SL, De Kadt J, Galagan S, Gilvydis J et al. Three methods of
delivering clinic-based training on syndromic management of sexually transmitted diseases
in South Africa: a pilot study. Sex Transm Infect. 2016;92:135–41.
13.	 Hoffman CM, Fritz L, Matlakala N, Mbambazela N, Railton JP, McIntyre JA et al.
Community-based strategies to identify the unmet need for care of individuals with
sexually transmitted infection-associated symptoms in rural South Africa. Trop Med Int
Health. 2019;24:987–93.
14.	 Aaron K, Jordan S, Schwebke J, Van Der Pol B, Hook E. Continued sexual activity following
onset of urethritis symptoms in men. Sex Transm Dis. 2018;45(Suppl. 2):S38.
15.	 Ham DC, Hariri S, Kamb M, Mark J, Ilunga R, Forhan S et al. Quality of sexually transmitted
infection case management services in Gauteng Province, South Africa: an evaluation of
health providers’ knowledge, attitudes, and practices. Sex Transm Dis. 2016;43:23–9.
16.	 Alemayehu A, Godana W. Knowledge and practice of clinicians regarding syndromic
management of sexually transmitted infections in public health facilities of Gamo Gofa
Zone, South Ethiopia. J Sex Transm Dis. 2015;2015:310409.
17.	 Hussain MF, Khanani MR, Siddiqui SE, Manzar N, Raza S, Qamar S. Knowledge, attitudes
& practices (KAP) of general practitioners (GPS) regarding sexually transmitted diseases
(STDS) and HIV/AIDS in Karachi, Pakistan. J Pak Med Assoc. 2011;61:202–5.
18.	 Adhikari LM, Thapa SB, Sherchan L, Adhikari C. Effectiveness of syndromic STI case
management/RH training in knowledge and practice of auxiliary health workers. J
Universal Coll Med Sci. 2014;2:34–7.
19.	 Garcia PJ, Carcamo CP, Garnett GP, Campos PE, Holmes KK. Improved STD syndrome
management by a network of clinicians and pharmacy workers in Peru: the PREVEN
Network. PLoS One. 2012;7.
115
Annex 3. Evidence-to-decision table: urethral discharge
Table A3.4. Studies included in the diagnostic accuracy of syndromic approaches to urethral discharge
Study
Country
Design
n
STI prevalence
Setting
Population
(age group)
Flow chart description(s) Reference test(s)
Bhavsar et al. (1)
India
Cross-sectional
17
N. gonorrhoeae: 88.2
Hospital skin and
venereal disease
outpatient department
General population men
(15–70 years)
History, risk assessment
and genital examination
N. gonorrhoeae:
Gram stain
Chandeying et
al. (2)
Thailand
Cross-sectional
129
N. gonorrhoeae: 32.6;
C. trachomatis: 23.3;
STI units
General population men
(mean and median age =
30 years)
History, risk assessment
and genital examination
plus microscopy
N. gonorrhoeae:
culture and/or PCR
C. trachomatis: PCR
Liu et al. (3)
China
Cross-sectional
347
N. gonorrhoeae: 61.1
C. trachomatis: 23.6
N. gonorrhoeae or
C. trachomatis: 69.2
STD clinics
General population men
(18–83 years)
History and risk
assessment
N. gonorrhoeae or
C. trachomatis: PCR
Tsai et al. (4)
Taiwan
Cross-sectional
335
N. gonorrhoeae or
C. trachomatis: 40.6
STD clinic,
genitourinary
outpatient clinic
General population men
(17–50 years)
History, risk assessment
and genital examination
N. gonorrhoeae or C.
trachomatis: PCR
Wang et al. (5)
China
Cross-sectional
325
N. gonorrhoeae: 64.3
C. trachomatis: 16.3
N. gonorrhoeae or
C. trachomatis: 72.6
Urban STD clinics
General population men
(16–63 years)
History, risk assessment
and genital examination
plus microscopy for Gram
staining
N. gonorrhoeae:
Gram stain + culture
C. trachomatis: PCR
Yu et al. (6)
Taiwan
Cross-sectional
307
N. gonorrhoeae: 10.1
C. trachomatis: 14.3
STD Control Center
clinic
General population men
(16–50 years)
History, risk assessment
and genital examination
N. gonorrhoeae/
C.trachomatis:
PCR microscopy
plus culture
116
ANNEX 4. EVIDENCE-TO-DECISION TABLE:
VAGINAL DISCHARGE
Should other syndromic management algorithms be used to
identify and treat women for common sexually transmitted
infections rather than the current WHO algorithms based
on risk or speculum examination?
Population:
Women presenting to clinics with vaginal
discharge symptoms
Intervention and comparator:
Other syndromic management algorithms
versus current WHO algorithms
Purpose of the test:
To identify and treat cervical infections caused
by Neisseria gonorrhoeae and Chlamydia
trachomatis and vaginal infections caused by
Trichomonas vaginalis and bacterial vaginosis
Role of the test:
Syndromic management may consist of
different components: history and risk
assessment, speculum examination, vaginal
samples for Gram staining and microscopy
and/or point-of-care testing
Linked treatments:
Treatments for vaginal infections caused
by T. vaginalis, bacterial vaginosis and/or
Candida albicans and/or treatment for cervical
infections caused by N. gonorrhoeae and/or
C. trachomatis with combination of ceftriaxone
and azithromycin dual treatment
Anticipated outcomes:
Critical: treatment rate (true positive), over-
and undertreatment (false positive and
false negative), true negatives, treatment
side-effects, antimicrobial resistance,
identification of other reproductive diseases
Important: reproductive health outcomes,
maternal outcomes, infant and child outcomes
Other: coverage, patient and provider
acceptability, partner notification and treatment
Setting:
Outpatient; community
Perspective:
Population level
Subgroups:
To consider pregnant women and key
populations: transgender persons, female
sex workers, people living with HIV
(immunocompromised)
Background:
Syndromic management refers to a strategy for
identifying and treating STIs based on specific
syndromes (symptoms identified by a patient)
and signs (clinically-observed signs of infection)
associated with clearly defined causes.
Cervical infections include N. gonorrhoeae and
C. trachomatis and vaginal infections include
Trichomonas vaginalis, bacterial vaginosis
and also with candidiasis, which is part of the
resident flora.
When tests are not available or costly, different
clinical flow charts or algorithms to aid clinicians
in the syndromic management of people with
symptoms of STI have been recommended.
The last clinical guidelines for the syndromic
management of vaginal discharge from WHO
were published in the 2003 WHO guidelines
for the management of sexually transmitted
infections (see Fig. A4.1 and A4.2 for current
algorithms)
117
Annex 4. Evidence-to-decision table: vaginal discharge
Assessment
Judgement
Research evidence
Problem
Is the problem a priority?
No
Probably no
Probably yes
Yes
Varies
Don’t know
Cervical infections
Untreated N. gonorrhoeae and C. trachomatis infection can lead to pelvic
inflammatory disease, which could lead to complications such as tubo-
ovarian abscess, perihepatitis, ectopic pregnancy, infertility and chronic
pain and/or permanent damage to reproductive organs causing infertility.
Untreated N. gonorrhoeae infection could also lead to premature delivery or
spontaneous abortion and cause ophthalmia neonatorum.
Vaginal infections
T. vaginalis and bacterial vaginosis are curable infections of the reproductive
tract. If untreated, T. vaginalis infection could lead to endometriosis, cervical
cancer, infertility and placental membrane rupture, leading to preterm delivery,
and bacterial vaginosis infection could lead to miscarriage, preterm delivery
and increased susceptibility to and ability to transmit other STIs such as HIV.
Antimicrobial resistance
Increasing concern about N. gonorrhoeae treatment has been documented
globally, with high rates of resistance to penicillin, tetracyclines and
quinolones. Resistance to newer medications (azithromycin) and reports of
treatment failures and reduced susceptibility of cephalosporins (a last-line
treatment for N. gonorrhoeae) raise concern that N. gonorrhoeae could
become untreatable.
Test accuracy
How accurate is the test?
Very inaccurate
Inaccurate
Accurate
Very accurate
Varies
Don’t know
We updated one review (1) up to September 2019 that assessed the
diagnostic accuracy of different algorithms to identify women who have
cervical infections N. gonorrhoeae and/or C. trachomatis and also for vaginal
infections bacterial vaginosis and/or T. vaginalis.
Cervical infections
The sensitivity and specificity of different steps in the algorithms were
synthesized when appropriate and calculated by adding sensitivity and
specificity together for some algorithms (such as WHO algorithms).
Table A4.1. Sensitivity and specificity of tests for
cervical infections
To identify N. gonorrhoeae and/or C. trachomatis
Sensitivity
Specificity
Treat all
100%
0%
Risk assessment (2)
63
60
Risk assessment or genital exam (3)
92
12
Genital exam (3)
78
20
Speculum (4)
73
56
Gram stain and microscopy (5)
52
73
Speculum or microscopy
87
41
WHO algorithm by risk (low prevalence)
90
34
WHO algorithm by risk (high prevalence)
100
0
WHO algorithm by speculum (low prevalence)
49
68
WHO algorithm by speculum (high prevalence)
78
20
118
Guidelines for the management of symptomatic sexually transmitted infections
Judgement
Research evidence
Test accuracy
Hypothetical sensitivity and specificity of point-of-care tests for N. gonorrhoeae
Parameter
Point-of-care test a
Point-of-care test c
Sensitivity
0.80
0.95
Specificity
0.90
0.98
Vaginal infections
Table A4.2 shows the sensitivity and specificity of testing and syndromic
approaches to detect bacterial vaginosis and/or T. vaginalis from the update of
the review (see Table A4.4 for a summary of the included studies).
Table A4.2. GRADE summary of findings table for
bacterial vaginosis and T. vaginalis flow charts
Approach
Number
of studies
Sensitivity
(%)
Specificity
(%)
Certainty
of the
evidence
Treat all with
conditions
–
100
0
–
History, risk
assessment
9
56.2
(54.5–57.9)
71.0
(69.4–72.6)
Moderate
Plus speculum
exam
8
74.8
(74.0–75.6)
53.2
(52.5–54.0)
Moderate
Lab (wet mount,
gram stain)
2
91.7
(89.2–94.2)
100
(99.9–100)
Moderate
Local adaptation
5
53.1
(50.5–55.6)
85.8
(84.7–86.9)
Moderate
Moderate certainty of evidence due to some concern with risk of bias of the
included studies; the results were precise with no inconsistency.
The review by Zemouri et al. (1) also reported prevalence: T. vaginalis ranged
from 0.9% in Colombia to 17.3% in Uganda; bacterial vaginosis ranged from
39% in Colombia to 47.7% in Uganda.
The Guideline Development Group agreed that the sensitivity and specificity
should have increased when adding additional steps in order to not miss
women with infection; however, the increases did not occur and could not be
explained by the different populations in the studies, setting or other factors.
The use of pH was also compared with treating all women with discharge
and treating women with confirmed excess discharge (6). The sensitivity was
greater, and specificity was reduced slightly (T. vaginalis) and translated into
small differences in the numbers of people missed or treated unnecessarily.
119
Annex 4. Evidence-to-decision table: vaginal discharge
Judgement
Research evidence
Test accuracy
Table A4.3. Sensitivity, specificity and predictive value of clinical diagnosis for T. vaginalis infection and bacterial
vaginosis among 445 young women of reproductive age presenting with symptoms in Mysore, India
Variable
Bacterial vaginosis
T. vaginalis infection
Sensitivity
(%)
Specificity
(%)
Positive
predictive
value (%)
Negative
predictive
value (%)
Sensitivity
(%)
Specificity
(%)
Positive
predictive
value (%)
Negative
predictive
value (%)
Abnormal vaginal discharge
76.4
25.6
17.2
84.3
73.3
24.7
9.9
89.2
Vulval itching
43.1
64.2
19.6
84.8
57.8
64.5
15.5
93.1
Burning sensation
23.6
66.5
12.5
81.1
37.8
68.7
11.9
90.8
Discharge and⁄or itching
95.8
12.7
18.2
93.7
91.1
11.5
10.4
92.0
Signs of excess vaginal dischargea
37.5
61.1
16.4
82.8
55.6
63.3
14.5
92.7
Signs of vaginal erythema
20.8
83.6
20.5
83.9
42.2
85.7
25.0
93.0
pH >4.5
79.2
50.1
24.4
92.2
77.8
46.5
14.1
94.5
Positive Whiff test (amine test)
23.6
89.9
32.1
93.3
35.6
90.3
29.1
92.6
Wet mount examinationb
13.9
97.2
47.4
84.6
53.3
100.0
100.0
94.9
Symptoms and signs
40.3
70.1
21.4
85.7
51.1
70.7
16.4
92.8
Positive Whiff test and⁄or pH >4.5
83.3
47.0
24.2
93.3
82.9
43.5
14.1
95.6
All variables are compared to T. vaginalis culture as the gold standard for T. vaginalis and to Nugent score of ≥7 on Gram stain for bacterial vaginosis.
aVaginal discharge defined as yellow or green discharge for T. vaginalis and milky white discharge for bacterial vaginosis.
bWet mount examination shows trichomonads for T. vaginalis and Clue cells.
Source: Madhivanan et al. (6).
120
Guidelines for the management of symptomatic sexually transmitted infections
Judgement
Research evidence
Certainty of the evidence
of test accuracy
What is the overall certainty
of the evidence of test
accuracy?
Very low
Low
Moderate
High
No included studies
Certainty of the evidence of the effects of management
What is the evidence
of effects of the
management that is
guided by the test results?
Very low
Low
Moderate
High
No included studies
Effects of treatment interventions
We modelled different flow charts to identify and manage women coming to the
clinic with vaginal discharge (see the supplementary materials for a description
of modelling of the cost and effectiveness of different approaches to diagnose
N. gonorrhoeae and C. trachomatis among women with vaginal discharge).
We modelled the effects of treatment based on the following:
Dual treatment N. gonorrhoeae and C. trachomatis: azithromycin and ceftriaxone
Treatment for T. vaginalis and bacterial vaginosis: metronidazole
All symptomatic women (with vaginal discharge, itching, etc.) are treated for
T. vaginalis and bacterial vaginosis
Table A4.4. Assumptions in the model
Treatment effects
%
Proportion completing treatment when indicated
100
Pelvic inflammatory disease
Proportion of women with untreated gonorrhoea or
chlamydia developing (pelvic inflammatory disease)
0.3
Proportion of women with pelvic inflammatory disease
requiring and accessing outpatient services
0.15
Proportion of women with pelvic inflammatory disease
requiring and accessing hospital services
0.02
Proportion of women with untreated pelvic inflammatory
disease becoming infertile or having an ectopic pregnancy
0.25
Partner management and reinfection
Proportion of treated women receiving partner treatment
0.8
Number of partners receiving treatment per woman
0.2
Proportion of women reinfected among those whose partner
is treated
0.3
Proportion of women reinfected among those whose partner
is not treated
0.6
Antimicrobial resistance
In the base case, we assume no additional treatment costs due to antimicrobial
resistance infections directly. We investigate the case in which all antibiotic
prescriptions incur a cost – “antimicrobial resistance tax” – based on wider
costs of antibiotic resistance (future treatment costs of resistant infection,
increased morbidity and mortality associated with antimicrobial resistance
in general and costs of developing new treatments). The tax was added to
individuals treated, whether appropriately or inappropriately.
121
Annex 4. Evidence-to-decision table: vaginal discharge
Judgement
Research evidence
Certainty of the evidence of
the effects of management
What is the overall
certainty of the
evidence of effects of
the management that is
guided by the test results?
Very low
Low
Moderate
High
No included studies
Desirable effects
How substantial are the
desirable anticipated
effects of syndromic
approach?
Trivial
Small
Moderate
Large
Varies
Don’t know
The diagnostic test accuracy and treatment data were used to model the effects
on important outcomes.
We modelled the effects among women with different prevalence of
N. gonorrhoeae and C. trachomatis infections based on a systematic review of
the literature:
Parameter
Scenario 1
Scenario 3
Prevalence of gonorrhoea or chlamydia
among women with vaginal discharge
5%
20%
See Table A4.5 for the different approaches that were modelled and
Table A4.6 for the assessment of the magnitude of the effects for each
syndromic approach.
The benefits and harm have been assessed as best (dark green) or least benefit
(light green), and harm (yellow) or most harm (red).
Undesirable effects
How substantial are the
undesirable anticipated
effects?
Large
Moderate
Small
Trivial
Varies
Don’t know
Values
Is there important
uncertainty about or
variability in how much
people value the main
outcomes?
Important uncertainty or
variability
Possibly important
uncertainty or variability
Probably no important
uncertainty or variability
No important uncertainty
or variability
The Guideline Development Group identified the following outcomes as
critical: treatment rate (true positive), overtreatment (false positive) and
undertreatment (false negative), true negatives, treatment side-effects,
antimicrobial resistance, identification of other reproductive diseases
The Guideline Development Group placed highest value on the incidence
of pelvic inflammatory disease due to missed cases but also considered
overtreatment, which can lead to an increase in antimicrobial resistance.
Reproductive health outcomes, maternal outcomes and infant and child
outcomes are important.
Other considerations: coverage, patient and provider acceptability and partner
notification and treatment.
122
Guidelines for the management of symptomatic sexually transmitted infections
Judgement
Research evidence
Resources required
How large are the resource
requirements (costs)?
Large costs
Moderate costs
Negligible costs and savings
Moderate savings
Large savings
Varies
Don’t know
Table A4.7. Costs used in the cost–effectiveness
model
Costs of flow charts
Cost in US dollars
Risk assessment
0.00
Speculum exam
1.00
Speculum and Gram stain
1.50
Point-of-care test: lower sensitivity of 80% and
specificity of 90%
3.00
Flow chart 4, 5, 6: point-of-care test (best sensitivity
of 95% and specificity of 98%)
16.00
Treatment and outcome costs
Dual treatment (chlamydia and gonorrhoea)
1.66
Treatment for T. vaginalis and bacterial vaginitis
0.10
Partner treatment
0.12
Average outpatient costs per case of pelvic
inflammatory disease
4.00
Average cost of hospitalization
45.00
Average costs to woman to access health services
1.00
Social costs of infertility and ectopic pregnancy
500.00
Cost of antimicrobial resistance
Tax
5.00
Costs of flow charts from literature since 2010
Staffing costs are the largest component of providing mobile health services to
South African rural communities; screening and treatment of STI had marginal
cost (8).
The cost of a syndromic approach to treat symptoms of vaginal discharge at
a nongovernmental sexual health clinic in Bulgaria was €24.08 per person
treated (assessment of risk factors, speculum examination and microscopy
were used) (2).
123
Annex 4. Evidence-to-decision table: vaginal discharge
Judgement
Research evidence
Resources required
Table A4.8. Costs used in the cost–effectiveness
model
STI
Treatment
Dose per day
Treatment
duration
Drugs, per dose
(US dollars)
Drugs and
service delivery
(US dollars)
Gonorrhoea
Ceftriaxone
250 mg
1
1 day
0.57
10.71
Chlamydia and
mycoplasma
Azithromycin
500 mg
2
1 day
0.38
10.95
Trichomoniasis
Metronidazole
500 mg
4
1 day
0.01
10.05
Diagnostic test
Gonorrhoea and
chlamydia
NAAT: assuming a price reduction starting
2016, from US$ 20 as of 2016 (specimen
collection at primary level; testing in
secondary and tertiary care facilities)
12.00
Trichomoniasis
Wet mount (point of care)
4.00
Certainty of evidence
of required resources
What is the certainty of
the evidence of resource
requirements (costs)?
Very low
Low
Moderate
High
No included studies
The estimated average tool cost per episode for women treated with acute NG
was US $205. This estimate does not include intangible (e.g. pain) and indirect
costs (e.g., lost productivity). Uwusu-Edusei 2010).
Cost–effectiveness
Does the cost–
effectiveness of the
intervention favour
the intervention or the
comparison?
Favours the comparison
Probably favours the
comparison
Does not favour either
the intervention or the
comparison
Probably favours the
intervention
Favours the intervention
Varies
No included studies
The Guideline Development Group favoured the following algorithms rather
than the WHO algorithms based on balance of benefits and harm and costs.
Low prevalence (5% N. gonorrhoeae and C. trachomatis)
Favourable choices:
•	 treat all women who are positive using lower sensitivity (80%) and
specificity (90%) rapid point-of-care tests; and
•	 treat based on point-of-care tests among women who have positive risk
assessment or confirmed vaginal discharge by genital examination.
Further favourable choices:
•	 treat based on positive speculum among women who have positive risk
assessment or confirmed vaginal discharge by genital examination; and
•	 treat based on positive speculum among all women
The WHO algorithm using speculum is cheapest but results in the highest
missed cases and therefore most pelvic inflammatory disease and moderate
overtreatment, and the WHO algorithm by risk has trivial pelvic inflammatory
disease and missed cases but moderate to high overtreatment, which results
in higher cost.
124
Guidelines for the management of symptomatic sexually transmitted infections
Judgement
Research evidence
Cost–effectiveness
Higher prevalence (20% N. gonorrhoeae and C. trachomatis)
Favourable choices:
•	 treat based on positive speculum or microscopy among women who
have positive risk assessment or confirmed vaginal discharge by genital
examination;
•	 treat based on positive speculum or microscopy among all women; and
•	 treat based on positive risk assessment or confirmed vaginal discharge by
genital examination.
Favourable but slightly costly:
•	 treat based on confirmed vaginal discharge by genital examination.
Favourable but slightly high pelvic inflammatory disease (but not costly):
•	 treat all women who are positive on a low-sensitivity and -specificity point-
of-care test; and
•	 treat all women who are positive on a speculum exam.
The Guideline Development Group agreed that the approach should be similar
across prevalence settings – and therefore a common approach was chosen
that balanced the benefits, harm and costs in both settings.
Equity
What would be the impact
on health equity?
Reduced
Probably reduced
Probably no impact
Probably increased
Increased
Varies
Don’t know
From a systematic review of literature up to February 2020
Issues of who is seeking care by symptoms and tested
Providers were significantly more likely to test symptomatic African-American
women for STI than symptomatic white women (10).
Treatment seeking for vaginal discharge was disproportionately high among
poor women in Mumbai, India and associated with problematic husbands,
spousal abuse, tension and stress and higher perceived empowerment (11).
A remote area of South Africa with poor access to health-care services has a
large burden of untreated symptomatic and asymptomatic STIs, demonstrating
the importance of out-of-facility STI services through a mobile clinic (12).
Studies indicate a relationship between socioeconomic status and STIs.
•	 A higher prevalence of chlamydia was found in patients in the public health
sector versus private in Brazil (13).
•	 A higher prevalence of chlamydia was found among illiterate women versus
women with higher education and in women living in rural areas versus
urban areas (14).
•	 An inverse association was found between education and chlamydia
and gonorrhoea among young women in the United States of America.
Black women who were enrolled in or had graduated from college
had significantly higher predicted probabilities of having chlamydia or
gonorrhoea than white females with less than a high school diploma (15).
•	 The prevalence of bacterial vaginosis, C. trachomatis and T. vaginalis is
significantly higher among non-Hispanic African-Americans versus white
Americans (16–19).
•	 Working women and spouses of unskilled workers had a higher risk of
infection than homemakers and the spouses of semiskilled or skilled
workers (20).
•	 Female adolescents in juvenile detention facilities had high chlamydia test
positivity (21–24).
125
Annex 4. Evidence-to-decision table: vaginal discharge
Judgement
Research evidence
Acceptability
Is the intervention
acceptable to key
stakeholders?
No
Probably no
Probably yes
Yes
Varies
Don’t know
Clinicians
Half were willing to follow the syndromic approach (25); 80% always conduct
examination, and no preference for watching and waiting, symptomatic
therapy, empiric antibiotics or referral (26).
Awareness of the consequences of no treatment increased the willingness to
use the syndromic approach (25,26).
A South African study in 50 public health facilities found that most facilities
had STI guidelines available, and 64% had STI treatment flow charts posted.
Assessment using standardized patient actors showed that the syndromic
management according to the guidelines was provided in only 61% of cases.
Only 19% received all predefined essential STI services, with significant gaps
in treatment for women (27). Similar gaps in provider knowledge and practice
have been identified in Gujarat (28) and Ethiopia (29).
Patients
Wide variability in seeking treatment – 15–87% (30–37).
Reasons for not seeking health care:
•	 formal advice not needed or rely on self-treatment (70% from Jiang et al.
(38); Ilankoon et al. (39));
•	 stigma (40,41);
•	 Discomfort or fear (5–8% from Ekabua et al. (42); 33% from Rosenheck et
al. (31));
•	 lack of awareness of symptoms or considered natural phenomena (64%
from Sharma et al. (35); 34% from Hoffman et al. (41); approximately 50%
from Tayerih et al. (37));
•	 disappointment in care due to persistent (23%) or recurrent (15%)
symptoms after previous treatment (41);
•	 disappointment with health services in general during previous visit(s) for
any reason (10% in Hoffman (41));
•	 costs (67% from Miller et al. (43); 89% from Jayapalan et al. (44); Tayerih et
al. (37));
•	 geographical access or transport (57% from Miller et al. (43); 86% from
Jayapalan et al. (44));
•	 lack of privacy (60% from Miller et al. (43); 67% from Jayapalan et al. (44));
•	 lack of free medicine (71% from Jayapalan et al. (44)); and
•	 lack of confidentiality (12% from Jayapalan et al. (44); 13% from Leichliter
et al. (45)).
In a study in India, 11 of 42 (26%) reported that, although they went to the
hospital, they could not disclose their symptoms (35).
Vaginal discharge was reported by 49% of female sex workers in central Brazil;
but 42% had not sought treatment at health-care facilities (46).
Of 986 female sex workers in Hong Kong Special Administrative Region, China,
7.8% reported having at least one episode of STI in the past six months. About
two thirds would either self-medicate or adopt a wait-and-see approach, and
about one third attended a private doctor or a doctor across the border. Only
26% reported attending a public STI clinic and 25% an NGO testing centre in
the past year (47).
126
Guidelines for the management of symptomatic sexually transmitted infections
Judgement
Research evidence
Acceptability
In Utter Pradesh, India, 84 (88.4%) of women living in urban slums sought
treatment for their STIs or reproductive tract infection problems from quacks.
Very few women had treatment from a government health facility (6.3%) or
from a private health facility (5.3%) (48).
In a study of pregnant women attending antenatal care in Sudan, 14.3% of
the participants declined gynaecological examinations; probably because most
(13.8%) perceived speculum examinations as a painful procedure. A total of
11.6% of the patients were embarrassed by their vaginal discharge and thus
refused to be examined. Others (7.1%) were in doubt and feared receiving a
positive result. In general, the reason for rejecting any of the examinations is
because most women thought being tested was an endeavour too great for
diseases they know they do not have (49).
College students in India had good knowledge about the prevention and
transmission of STIs; however, not many were aware of the clinical features
and complications of STIs. Only about 40% of students knew that vaginal
discharge was a symptom of STIs (50).
Among women seeking health care for the presence of symptoms, the length
of delay varied greatly, with some people seeking health care immediately
and others waiting for several months. Studies report that 39–45% of women
waited longer than seven days to see a health-care provider (51,52).
Feasibility
Is the intervention feasible
to implement?
No
Probably no
Probably yes
Yes
Varies
Don’t know
A syndromic management programme in Kenya effectively reduced the
incidence of STIs from its initiation (1990–1994) to 2000. The incidence
increased in 2001 when the programme was terminated (53).
A syndromic management programme applied in 25 rural primary health-
care units in the United Republic of Tanzania treated 12 895 people with STI
syndromes in 2 years. The programme was used by 50–75% of symptomatic
people (54).
An integrated network of physicians, midwives and pharmacy workers trained
in STI syndromic management (the PREVEN Network) was developed and
evaluated as part of a national urban community randomized trial of STI
prevention in Peru. Training pharmacy workers linked to a referral network
of clinicians proved feasible and acceptable. High turnover was challenging
but was overcome. By the end of the intervention, the Network included
792 pharmacies and 597 clinicians. Pharmacies reported more cases of STIs
than did clinicians. Evaluations by simulated patients showed significant and
substantial improvements in the management of people with STI syndromes at
pharmacies in the 10 intervention cities but not in the 10 control cities (55).
The implementation of STI management guidelines was evaluated in Pakistan.
Guideline adherence was associated with the sex of the patient, the type
of health facility, the availability of male and female doctors, the age of the
patient (dichotomized at 25 years) and diagnosis. Women attending the rural
health facility for STI treatment had 0.87 times the chance of guidelines being
followed compared with the urban health facility (56).
A syndromic management approach for vaginal discharge was effectively used
by nurses to diagnose vaginal infections within a primary care setting (57).
A medical record review of reproductive health services in Karachi found that
the health-care providers – doctors and midwives – had difficulties in using the
syndromic management algorithm (58).
127
Annex 4. Evidence-to-decision table: vaginal discharge
Summary of judgements
Judgement
Problem
No
Probably no
Probably
yes
Yes
Varies
Don’t know
Test accuracy
Very
inaccurate
Inaccurate
Accurate
Very
accurate
Varies
Don’t know
Desirable
effects
Trivial
Small
Moderate
Large
Varies
Don’t know
Undesirable
effects
Large
Moderate
Small
Trivial
Varies
Don’t know
Certainty of
the evidence of
test accuracy
Very low
Low
Moderate
High
No included
studies
Certainty of
the evidence of
the effects of
management
Very low
Low
Moderate
High
No included
studies
Certainty of
effects
Very low
Low
Moderate
High
No included
studies
Values
Important
uncertainty
or
variability
Possibly
important
uncertainty
or
variability
Probably no
important
uncertainty
or
variability
No
important
uncertainty
or
variability
Balance of
effects
Favours the
comparison
Probably
favours the
comparison
Does not
favour
either the
intervention
or the
comparison
Probably
favours the
intervention
Favours the
intervention
Varies
Don’t know
Resources
required
Large costs
Moderate
costs
Negligible
costs and
savings
Moderate
savings
Large
savings
Varies
Don’t know
Certainty
of evidence
of required
resources
Very low
Low
Moderate
High
No included
studies
Cost–
effectiveness
Favours the
comparison
Probably
favours the
comparison
Does not
favour
either the
intervention
or the
comparison
Probably
favours the
intervention
Favours the
intervention
Varies
No included
studies
Equity
Reduced
Probably
reduced
Probably no
impact
Probably
increased
Increased
Varies
Don’t know
Acceptability
No
Probably no
Probably
yes
Yes
Varies
Don’t know
Feasibility
No
Probably no
Probably
yes
Yes
Varies
Don’t know
128
Guidelines for the management of symptomatic sexually transmitted infections
Conclusions
Should other syndromic management algorithms be used to identify and treat
women for common sexually transmitted infections rather than the current WHO
algorithms based on risk or speculum examination?
Type of
recommendation
Strong
recommendation
against the
intervention
Conditional
recommendation
against the
intervention
Conditional
recommendation for
either the intervention
or the comparison
Conditional
recommendation
for the
intervention
Strong
recommendation
for the intervention
Recommendation
Recommendations for the management of vaginal discharge
For people with symptom of vaginal discharge, we recommend treatment for N. gonorrhoeae and/
or C. trachomatis and/or T. vaginalis on the same visit. We suggest treatment based on the results
of quality-assured molecular assays for N. gonorrhoeae and/or C. trachomatis and/or T. vaginalis. In
settings in which treatment based on the results of molecular assay in the same visit is not feasible
or that have limited or no molecular testing, we suggest treatment based on testing with quality-
assured rapid point-of-care tests or on syndromic treatment.
For people with symptom of vaginal discharge, good practice includes:
•	 taking a medical and sexual history and assessing the risk of STIs;
•	 performing a physical examination, including abdominal and pelvic examination, to assess
for pelvic inflammatory disease, surgical conditions or pregnancy and external vulvovaginal
examination to visualize any lesions, overt genital discharge or vulval erythema and
excoriations;
•	 bimanual digital examination of the vagina to (1) assess for cervical motion tenderness or pain
with palpation of the pelvic area to exclude pelvic inflammatory disease; and (2) to assess for
the presence of vaginal discharge and the colour and consistency of the discharge on the glove;
and
•	 offering HIV and syphilis testing and other preventive services as recommended in other
guidelines.
Settings in which treatment is based on quality-assured molecular assays in a laboratory with a
fully operational quality management system and results available on the same day of the visit
1.	We recommend treating N. gonorrhoeae and/or C. trachomatis and/or T. vaginalis based on the
results of quality-assured molecular assays on a self-collected, or clinician-collected, vaginal
swab or on a urine specimen (Algorithm 1 ).
2.	We suggest treating for bacterial vaginosis if vaginal discharge is present (for example,
tenacious or thin) or based on the results of microscopy, if available.
3.	We suggest treating for candidiasis, where indicated by type of discharge (such as curd-like with
vaginal itching) or by the results of microscopy, if available.
Settings in which same-day treatment is not feasible with molecular testing or with limited or no
molecular testing
1.	We suggest treating based on a quality-assured rapid test with a minimum sensitivity of 80%
and specificity of 90%, if available, to confirm or exclude infection with N. gonorrhoeae and
C. trachomatis (Algorithm 2 ).
2.	If the availability of a low-cost rapid test or molecular assay is limited, we suggest performing
a speculum examination and treat for N. gonorrhoeae and C. trachomatis if there is evidence
of cervicitis and perform a low-cost rapid test or molecular assay for people with a negative
speculum examination who are at high risk of infection with N. gonorrhoeae and C. trachomatis
and treat based on the test results (Algorithm 3 a).
129
Annex 4. Evidence-to-decision table: vaginal discharge
Recommendation
3.	If a rapid test is not available, we suggest treating people who have signs of cervicitis on
speculum examination for infection with N. gonorrhoeae and C. trachomatis (Algorithm 3 ).
4.	If a rapid test is not available and a speculum examination is not feasible or acceptable, we
suggest treating people for N. gonorrhoeae and C. trachomatis all persons at high risk of STIs
and all persons who have vaginal discharge on genital examination (Algorithm 4 ).
5.	We suggest treating people for bacterial vaginosis and T. vaginalis if vaginal discharge is present
or based on the results of microscopy, if available.
6.	We suggest treating people for candidiasis, where indicated by type of discharge (such as curd-
like with vaginal itching) or by the results of microscopy, if available.
Good practice includes.
•	 For people with recurrent or persistent vaginal discharge, good practice includes referring to
a centre with laboratory capacity to diagnose infection with N. gonorrhoeae, C. trachomatis,
M. genitalium and T. vaginalis and bacterial vaginosis and to test for antimicrobial-resistant
N. gonorrhoeae and M. genitalium (if there is a test) or for a specialist’s assessment (STI expert
and physician or a gynaecologist), when no such testing is available in primary health care centres.
Justification
Bacterial vaginosis and/or T. vaginalis
Although microscopy was the most accurate with no false treatments and less than 1% of cases
missed, the costs of implementing microscopy in settings that currently do not have facilities
outweighs the costs of treating everyone with confirmed vaginal discharge for bacterial vaginosis
and T. vaginalis and the harm to people unnecessarily treated (about 40%). We considered
the effects of screening for bacterial vaginosis or T. vaginalis using pH testing compared with
confirmed vaginal discharge and found that the differences in people missed and people
unnecessarily treated were negligible, since the costs of treatment are relatively low.
N. gonorrhoeae and C. trachomatis
•	 Performing molecular assay tests for N. gonorrhoeae, C. trachomatis or T. vaginalis and basing
treatment on these results leads to the most people treated correctly when treatment is
provided on the same day.
•	 Using a low-cost rapid point-of-care test with 80% sensitivity and 90% specificity will lead to
fewer missed and falsely treated people than other syndromic approaches and no treatment.
•	 Performing a speculum examination and treating people with cervicitis and then microscopy for
people who were negative on speculum examination may also lead to fewer missed cases and
falsely treated people than using a rapid point-of-care test (at a minimum of 80% sensitivity
and 90% specificity) for everyone. Alternatively, if a rapid point-of-care test is used for the
people with a negative speculum examination, there would be even fewer missed cases and
falsely treated people.
•	 Treating based only on the results of a speculum examination will still result in similar pelvic
inflammatory disease cases and similar costs to a rapid point-of-care test, although the number
of people treated unnecessarily would be slightly higher when using speculum examination.
•	 If everyone at high risk (including with risk factors in high prevalence settings) and/or people
with confirmed vaginal discharge are treated, the costs may be higher than strategies with rapid
point-of-care tests or speculum examination, but there are large beneficial reductions in the
number of pelvic inflammatory disease cases and, compared with treating everyone, there are
fewer unnecessarily treated people.
130
Guidelines for the management of symptomatic sexually transmitted infections
Fig. A4.1. WHO algorithm based on risk
• Educate and council
• Promote condom use and provide condoms
• Offer HIV counselling and testing if both facilities are available
Take history and examine
Assess risk
Person with symptom of vaginal
discharge, vulval itching or burning
Yes
Yes
No
No
No
TREAT FOR
BACTERIAL VAGINOSIS AND
TRICHOMONAS VAGINALIS
Use appropriate flowchart
for additional treatment
Use flowchart for
lower abdominal pain
TREAT FOR GONOCOCCAL
INFECTION, CHLAMYDIA
TRACHOMATIS, BACTERIAL
VAGINOSIS AND
TRICHOMONAS VAGINALIS
• Educate and council
• Promote condom use and
provide condoms
• Offer HIV counselling and
testing if both facilities are
available
TREAT FOR
CANDIDA ALBICANS
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Abnormal discharge
or vulval erythema?
Any other
genital disease?
Vulval oedema/curd-
like discharge, erythema,
excoriations present?
Lower abdominal
tenderness?
High GC/CT prevalance
setting or risk assessment
positive?
131
Annex 4. Evidence-to-decision table: vaginal discharge
Fig. A4.2. WHO algorithm based on speculum (and microscopy for bacterial
vaginosis and T. vaginalis)
Take history and examine patient
(external, speculum and bimanual)
Assess risk
Person with symptom of vaginal discharge,
vulval itching or burning
No
No
Use flowchart for
lower abdominal pain
TREAT FOR
TRICHOMONAS
VAGINALIS
• Educate and council
• Promote condom use and provide condoms
• Manage and treat partner
• Offer HIV counselling and testing if both facilities are available
• Ask patient to return if necessary
TREAT FOR
BACTERIAL VAGINOSIS
TREAT FOR
CANDIDA ALBICANS
TREAT FOR GONOCOCCAL INFECTION AND CHLAMYDIA TRACHOMATIS
PLUS vaginal infection according to speculum
and microscope examination findings
Perform wet mount/Gram stain microscopy of vaginal specimen
Yes
Yes
Lower abdominal tenderness
or cervical motion tenderness
present?
Cervical mucopus/erosions, or
High GC/CT prevalence setting, or
Risk assessment positive?
Motile
trichomonads
No abnormal
findings
Budding yeasts or
pseudohyphae seen
Clue cells seen
plus pH>4.5 or KOH
positive
132
Guidelines for the management of symptomatic sexually transmitted infections
References
1.	 Zemouri C, Wi TE, Kiarie J, Seuc A, Mogasale V, Latif A et al. The performance of the
vaginal discharge syndromic management in treating vaginal and cervical infection: a
systematic review and meta-analysis. PLoS One. 2016;11:e0163365.
2.	 Cornier N, Petrova E, Cavailler P, Dentcheva R, Terris-Prestholt F, Janin A et al. Optimising
the management of vaginal discharge syndrome in Bulgaria: cost–effectiveness of four
clinical algorithms with risk assessment. Sex Transm Infect. 2010;86:303–9.
3.	 Tolosa JE, Rodriguez A, Muller E, Ruiz-Parra A, Nunez-Forero L, Moyano L et al. Accuracy
of syndromic diagnosis and management for vaginal discharge and cervicitis in women of
reproductive age in Bogota, Colombia. Int J Gynecol Obstet. 2012;119(S3):729.
4.	 Haberland N, Winikoff B, Sloan N, Coggins C, Elias C. Case finding and case management
of chlamydia and gonorrhea infections among women: What we do and do not know. New
York: Population Council; 1999 (https://knowledgecommons.popcouncil.org/departments_
sbsr-rh/496, accessed 22 March 2021).
5.	 Sloan NL, Winikoff B, Haberland N, Coggins C, Elias C. Screening and syndromic
approaches to identify gonorrhea and chlamydial infection among women. Stud Fam
Plann. 2000;31:55–68.
6.	 Madhivanan P, Krupp K, Hardin J, Karat C, Klausner JD, Reingold AL. Simple and
inexpensive point-of-care tests improve diagnosis of vaginal infections in resource
constrained settings. Trop Med Int Health. 2009;14:703–8.
7.	 Korenromp EL, Wi T, Resch S, Stover J, Broutet N. Costing of national STI program
implementation for the global STI control strategy for the health sector, 2016–2021. PLoS
One. 2017;12:e0170773.
8.	 Schnippel K, Lince-Deroche N, van den Handel T, Molefi S, Bruce S, Firnhaber C. Cost
evaluation of reproductive and primary health care mobile service delivery for women in
two rural districts in South Africa. PLoS One 2015;10:e0119236.
9.	 Owusu-Edusei Jr K, Gift TL, Chesson HW. Treatment cost of acute gonococcal infections:
Estimates from employer-sponsored private insurance claims data in the United States,
2003–2007. Sex Transm Dis. 2010;37:316–8.
10.	 Goyal MK, Hayes KL, Mollen CJ. Racial disparities in testing for sexually transmitted
infections in the emergency department. Acad Emerg Med. 2012;19:6047.
11.	 Kostick KM, Schensul SL, Jadhav K, Singh R, Bavadekar A, Saggurti N. Treatment seeking,
vaginal discharge and psychosocial distress among women in urban Mumbai. Cult Med
Psychiatry. 2010;34:529–47.
12.	 Hoffman CM, Fritz L, Matlakala N, Mbambazela N, Railton JP, McIntyre JA, et al.
Community-based strategies to identify the unmet need for care of individuals with
sexually transmitted infection-associated symptoms in rural South Africa. Trop Med Int
Health. 2019;24:987–93.
13.	 Lobo CD, Quixabeira DC, Albuquerque GS, Tavares JR, Neto JS. Detection of Chlamydia
trachomatis by real-time PCR of a sample of the female population of Maceió, Alagoas,
Brazil referred to the private and public health services. J Am Soc Cytopathol. 2012;1:S50.
14.	 Ali MK, Shia JS. Detection of Chlamydia trachomatis and Neisseria gonorrhoeae in
genitourinary specimens in Iraq women by real time PCR assay. Res J Pharm Biol Chem Sci.
2018;9:799–808.
133
Annex 4. Evidence-to-decision table: vaginal discharge
15.	 Annang L, Walsemann KM, Maitra D, Kerr JC. Does education matter? Examining racial
differences in the association between education and STI diagnosis among black and white
young adult females in the U.S. Public Health Reports. 2010;125(Suppl. 4):110–21.
16.	 Centers for Disease Control and Prevention: CDC Grand Rounds: chlamydia prevention:
challenges and strategies for reducing disease burden and sequelae. MMWR Morb Mortal
Wkly Rep. 2011;60:370–3.
17.	 Gaydos CA, Hsieh YH, Barnes M, Quinn N, Agreda P, Jett-Goheen M et al. Trichomonas
vaginalis infection in women who submit self-obtained vaginal samples after internet
recruitment. Sex Transm Dis. 2011;38:828–32.
18.	 Lazenby GB, Soper DE, Nolte FS. Correlation of leukorrhea and Trichomonas vaginalis
infection. J Clin Microbiol. 2013;51:2323–7.
19.	 Cartwright CP, Pherson AJ, Harris AB, Clancey MS, Nye MB. Multicenter study establishing
the clinical validity of a nucleic-acid amplification-based assay for the diagnosis of
bacterial vaginosis. Diagn Microbiol Infect Dis. 2018;92:173–8.
20.	 Durai V, Varadharajan S, Muthuthandavan AR. Reproductive tract infections in rural India
– a population-based study. J Family Med Prim Care. 2019;8:3578–83.
21.	 Spaulding AC, Miller J, Trigg BG, Braverman P, Lincoln T, Reams PN et al. Screening for
sexually transmitted diseases in short-term correctional institutions: summary of evidence
reviewed for the 2010 Centers for Disease Control and Prevention sexually transmitted
diseases treatment guidelines. Sex Transm Dis. 2013;40:679–83.
22.	 Satterwhite CL, Newman D, Collins D, Torrone E. Chlamydia screening and positivity in
juvenile detention centers, United States, 2009–2011. Women Health. 2014;54:712–25.
23.	 Burghardt NO, Chow JM, Steiner A, Bauer HM. Trends in chlamydia screening, test
positivity, and treatment among females in California juvenile detention facilities, 2003–
2014. Sex Transm Dis. 2016;43:12–7.
24.	 Torrone E, Beeston T, Ochoa R, Richardson M, Gray T, Peterman T, Katz KA. Chlamydia
screening in juvenile corrections: even females considered to be at low risk are at high risk.
J Correct Health Care. 2016;22:21–7.
25.	 Ward K, Butler N, Mugabo P, Klausner J, McFarland W, Chen S et al. Provision of syndromic
treatment of sexually transmitted infections by community pharmacists: a potentially
underutilized HIV prevention strategy. Sex Transm Dis. 2003;30:609–13.
26.	 Anderson MR, Karasz A. How do clinicians manage vaginal complaints? An Internet survey.
MedGenMed. 2005;7:61.
27.	 Kohler PK, Marumo E, Jed SL, Mema G, Galagan S, Tapia K et al. A national evaluation
using standardised patient actors to assess STI services in public sector clinical sentinel
surveillance facilities in South Africa. Sex Transm Infect 2017; 93:247–52.
28.	 Sharma R, Prajapati S, Patel B, Kumar P. Evaluation of skill-oriented training on enhanced
syndromic case management (ESCM) of reproductive tract infections/sexually transmitted
infections (RTI/STIs) of care providers from three-tier health-care system of Gujarat. Indian
J Community Med. 2016;41:183–9.
29.	 Alemayehu A, Godana W. Knowledge and practice of clinicians regarding syndromic
management of sexually transmitted infections in public health facilities of Gamo Gofa
Zone, South Ethiopia. J Sex Transm Dis. 2015;2015:310409.
30.	 Jiang Z, Wang D, Hong Q, Cherry N, Cheng J, Chai J et al. Use of health services by women
with gynecological symptoms in rural China. World Health Popul. 2010;11:23–37.
134
Guidelines for the management of symptomatic sexually transmitted infections
31.	 Rosenheck R, Ngilangwa D, Manongi R, Kapiga S. Treatment-seeking behavior for sexually
transmitted infections in a high-risk population. AIDS Care. 2010;22:1350–8.
32.	 Samanta A, Ghosh S, Mukherjee S. Prevalence and health-seeking behavior of reproductive
tract infection/sexually transmitted infections symptomatics: a cross-sectional study
of a rural community in the Hooghly district of West Bengal. Indian J Public Health.
2011;55:38–41.
33.	 Hegde S, Agrawal T, Ramesh N, Sugara M, Joseph P, Singh S et al. Reproductive tract
infections among women in a peri-urban under privileged area in Bangalore, India:
knowledge, prevalence, and treatment seeking behavior. Ann Trop Med Public Health.
2013;6:215–20.
34.	 Girish HO, Kumar A, Balu PS. A study on STI morbidity pattern and STI treatment seeking
behavior among female sex workers of Davangere city, Central Karnataka. Int J Life Sci
Biotechnol Pharma Res. 2014;3:254–60.
35.	 Sharma D, Goel NK, Thakare MM. Prevalence of reproductive tract infection symptoms and
treatment-seeking behavior among women: a community-based study. Indian J Sex Transm
Dis AIDS. 2018;39:79–83.
36.	 Tanton C, Geary RS, Clifton S, Field N, Heap KL, Mapp F et al. Sexual health clinic
attendance and non-attendance in Britain: findings from the third National Survey of
Sexual Attitudes and Lifestyles (Natsal-3). Sex Transm Infect. 2018;94:268–76.
37.	 Tayerih K, Jozani ZB, Golchehregan H, Rostam-Afshar Z, Taj L, Nasab SA et al. Woman’s
sexual health knowledge and needs assessment in behavioral clinics and shelters in
Tehran. J Fam Reprod Health. 2019;13:26–34.
38.	 Jiang Q, Qin Q, Zhang X. HIV, syphilis, and condom use among female drug users in
Maanshan, China. Int J Gynaecol Obstet. 2010;110:158–9.
39.	 Ilankoon MPS, Goonewardena CSE, Fernandopulle RC, Rasika Perera PP. Women’s
knowledge and experience of abnormal vaginal discharge living in estates in Colombo
District, Sri Lanka. Int J Women Health Reprod Sci. 2017;5:90–6.
40.	 Arrindell D, Barclay L, Boxt J. The forgotten STI: a survey of knowledge about
trichomoniasis. Sex Transm Infect. 2013:89(Suppl. 1):A323.
41.	 Hoffman CM, Mbambazela N, Sithole P, Morre SA, Dubbink JH, Railton J et al. Provision of
sexually transmitted infection services in a mobile clinic reveals high unmet need in remote
areas of South Africa: a cross-sectional study. Sex Transm Dis. 2019;46:206–12.
42.	 Ekabua JE, Agan TU, Eklaki CU, Ekanew EI. Adjuncts to case assessment of vaginal
discharge syndrome in pregnant women. Asian Pac J Trop Med. 2010;3:63–5.
43.	 Miller MK, Dowd MD, Harrison CJ, Mollen CJ, Selvarangan R, Humiston SG. Prevalence of 3
sexually transmitted infections in a pediatric emergency department. Pediatr Emerg Care.
2015;31:107–12.
44.	 Jayapalan S. Healthcare-seeking preferences of patients with sexually transmitted infection
attending a tertiary care center in South Kerala. Indian J Sex Transm Dis. 2016;37:157–61.
45.	 Leichliter JS, Copen C, Dittus PJ. Confidentiality issues and use of sexually transmitted
disease services among sexually experienced persons aged 15-25 years – United States,
2013–2015. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. 2017;66:237–41.
46.	 de Matos MA, Caetano KA, Franca DD, Pinheiro RS, de Moraes LC, Teles SA. Vulnerability
to sexually transmitted infections in women who sell sex on the route of prostitution and
sex tourism in central Brazil. Rev Lat Am Enfermagem. 2013;21:906–12.
135
Annex 4. Evidence-to-decision table: vaginal discharge
47.	 Lee K Wong KH. What do female sex workers do if they have genital symptoms? Sex
Transm Infect. 2011;87(Suppl. 1):A129.
48.	 Kumar A. A health seeking behavior of the women of urban slums of Puducherry regarding
reproductive tract infections. Indian J Public Health Res Devel. 2017;8:152–6.
49.	 Abdelrahim NA, Ahmed HI, Fadl-Elmula IM, Bayoumi MA, Homeida MM. Sexually
transmitted infections other than HIV/AIDS among women of low socio-economic class
attending antenatal clinics in Khartoum, Sudan. Int J STD AIDS. 2017;28:781–7.
50.	 Subbarao NT, Akhilesh A. Knowledge and attitude about sexually transmitted infections
other than HIV among college students. Indian J Sex Transm Dis. 2017;38:10–4.
51.	 Malek AM, Chang CC, Clark DB, Cook RL. Delay in seeking care for sexually transmitted
diseases in young men and women attending a public STD clinic. Open AIDS J. 2013;7:7–13.
52.	 Denison HJ, Woods L, Bromhead C, Kennedy J, Grainger R, Jutel A et al. Healthcare-
seeking behaviour of people with sexually transmitted infection symptoms attending a
sexual health clinic in New Zealand. N Z Med J. 2018;131:40–9.
53.	 Cheluget B, Joesoef MR, Marum LH, Wandera C, Ryan CA, Decock KM et al. Changing
patterns in sexually transmitted disease syndromes in Kenya after the introduction of a
syndromic management program. Sex Transm Dis. 2004;31:522–5.
54.	 Grosskurth H, Mwijarubi E, Todd J, Rwakatare M, Orroth K, Mayaud P et al. Operational
performance of an STD control programme in Mwanza Region, Tanzania. Sex Transm
Infect. 2000;76:426–36.
55.	 Garcia PJ, Carcamo CP, Garnett GP, Campos PE, Holmes KK. Improved STD Syndrome
Management by a Network of Clinicians and Pharmacy Workers in Peru: the PREVEN
Network. PLoS ONE. 2012;7:e47750.
56.	 Khan MA, Javed W, Ahmed M, Walley J, Munir MA. Sexually transmitted disease
syndromic case management through public sector facilities: development and assessment
study in Punjab Pakistan. Ann Glob Health. 2014;80:486–92.
57.	 Kisa S, Taskin L. Validity of the symptomatic approach used by nurses in diagnosing
vaginal infections. J Clin Nurs. 2009;18:1059–68.
58.	 Mahmood MA, Saniotis A. Use of syndromic management algorithm for sexually
transmitted infections and reproductive tract infections management in community
settings in Karachi. J Pak Med Assoc. 2011;61:453–7.
59.	 Banneheke H, Fernandopulle R, Gunasekara U, Barua A, Fernando N, Wickremasinghe R.
Can Trichomonas immunochromatographic test increase the validity and reliability of WHO
syndromic algorithm for vaginal discharge as a screening tool for trichomoniasis? Ann Trop
Med Public Health. 2016;9:43–7.
60. Barry MS, Ba Diallo A, Diadhiou M, Mall I, Gassama O, Ndiaye Gueye MD et al. Accuracy of
syndromic management in targeting vaginal and cervical infections among symptomatic
women of reproductive age attending primary care clinics in Dakar, Senegal. Trop Med Int
Health. 2018;23:541–8.
61. Das A, Prabhakar P, Narayanan P, Neilsen G, Wi T, Kumta S et al. Prevalence and
assessment of clinical management of sexually transmitted infections among female sex
workers in two cities of India. Infect Dis Obstet Gynecol. 2011;2011:494769.
62.	 Desai VK, Kosambiya JK, Thakor HG, Umrigar DD, Khandwala BR, Bhuyan KK. Prevalence of
sexually transmitted infections and performance of STI syndromes against aetiological diagnosis,
in female sex workers of red light area in Surat, India. Sex Transm Infect. 2003;79:111–5.
136
Guidelines for the management of symptomatic sexually transmitted infections
63.	 Francis SC, Ao TT, Vanobberghen FM, Chilongani J, Hashim R, Andreasen A et al.
Epidemiology of curable sexually transmitted infections among women at increased risk
for HIV in northwestern Tanzania: inadequacy of syndromic management. PLoS One.
2014;9:e101221.
64.	 Garcia PJ, Chavez S, Feringa B, Chiappe M, Li W, Jansen KU et al. Reproductive tract
infections in rural women from the highlands, jungle, and coastal regions of Peru. Bull
World Health Organ. 2004;82:483–92.
65.	 Lima TM, Teles LM, de Oliveira AS, Campos FC, Barbosa Rde C, Pinheiro AK et al. [Vaginal
discharge in pregnant women: comparison between syndromic approach and examination
of clinical nursing practice]. Rev Esc Enferm USP. 2013;47:1265–71.
66.	 Moherdaui F, Urquia M, Castro de Midecne L, Morales G. Validation of STI flowcharts for
the syndromic management of vaginal discharge and lower abdominal pain in Honduras.
Rev Med Hondur. 2005;6:263.
67.	 Molaei B, Mohmmadian F, Tadayon P, Gholami H, Kiani M, Rashtchi V. Comparative
evaluation of accuracy and compatibility level of different diagnostic methods for bacterial
vaginosis. Kuwait Med J. 2018;50:205–12.
68.	 Msuya SE, Uriyo J, Stray-Pedersen B, Sam NE, Mbizvo EM. The effectiveness of a syndromic
approach in managing vaginal infections among pregnant women in northern Tanzania.
East Afr J Public Health. 2009;6:263–7.
69.	 Onyekonwu CL, Olumide YM, Oresanya FA, Onyekonwu GC. Vaginal discharge: aetiological
agents and evaluation of syndromic management in Lagos. Niger J Med. 2011;20:155–62.
70.	 Romoren M, Velauthapillai M, Rahman M, Sundby J, Klouman E, Hjortdahl P.
Trichomoniasis and bacterial vaginosis in pregnancy: inadequately managed with the
syndromic approach. Bull World Health Organ. 2007;85:297–304.
71.	 Tann CJ, Mpairwe H, Morison L, Nassimu K, Hughes P, Omara M et al. Lack of effectiveness
of syndromicmanagement in targeting vaginal infections in pregnancy in Entebbe, Uganda.
Sex Transm Infect. 2006;82:285–9.
72.	 Vallely LM, Toliman P, Ryan C, Rai G, Wapling J, Gabuzzi J et al. Performance of syndromic
management for the detection and treatment of genital Chlamydia trachomatis, Neisseria
gonorrhoeae and Trichomonas vaginalis among women attending antenatal, well woman
and sexual health clinics in Papua New Guinea: a cross-sectional study. BMJ Open.
2017;7:e018630.
137
Annex 4. Evidence-to-decision table: vaginal discharge
Table A4.4. Studies included in the review of sensitivity and specificity of vaginal infections (bacterial vaginosis and/or
T. vaginalis)
Algorithm
Study
Country
Design
n
Prevalence (%)
Setting
Population
Flow chart
Reference test
+ speculum
exam
Local
adaptation
Banneheke
et al. (59)
Sri Lanka
Cross-
sectional
100
T. vaginalis: 6.0
STI clinics, well-
woman clinics,
gynaecology
clinics, institutional
health clinics
General population
women (15–45 years)
WHO syndromic
algorithm flow chart 1
+ clinical and speculum
examination;
WHO flow chart
1 + clinical and
speculum examination
+ Trichomonas
immunochromatographic
test
T. vaginalis: culture
+ speculum
exam
Barry et al.
(60)
Senegal
Cross-
sectional
276
N. gonorrhoeae: 1.1
C. trachomatis: 4.7
N. gonorrhoeae and
C. trachomatis: 5.4
Bacterial vaginosis (GV):
39.5
T. vaginalis: 2.5
Bacterial vaginosis and T.
vaginalis: 40.2
Hospitals, primary
health facilities
General population
women (18–49 years)
WHO syndromic
algorithm: symptoms,
history, risk assessment,
bimanual and speculum
examination
N. gonorrhoeae and
C. trachomatis: NAAT
Bacterial vaginosis:
Nugent scoring
T. vaginalis: wet
mount microscopy
+ speculum
exam
Lab (wet
mount,
Gram stain)
Local
adaptation
Cornier et
al. (2)
Bulgaria
Cross-
sectional
424
N. gonorrhoeae: 0.7
C. trachomatis: 9.2
T. vaginalis: 2.9
Either C. trachomatis or
N. gonorrhoeae: 9.5
Sexual health clinic
Non-pregnant women
WHO 1, 2, 3, MSF 1
N. gonorrhoeae and
C. trachomatis: NAAT
Bacterial vaginosis
and T. vaginalis:
microscopy
138
Guidelines for the management of symptomatic sexually transmitted infections
Algorithm
Study
Country
Design
n
Prevalence (%)
Setting
Population
Flow chart
Reference test
History, risk
assessment
Tsai et al. (4)
Taiwan
Cross-
sectional
335
N. gonorrhoeae: 14.1
C. trachomatis: 17.1
T. vaginalis: 31.1
Bacterial vaginosis: 71
Either N. gonorrhoeae or
C. trachomatis: 26.1
STI clinic for sex
workers
Sex workers
WHO 1, 2, NACO 3
N. gonorrhoeae and
C. trachomatis: NAAT
T. vaginalis: PCR
Bacterial vaginosis:
Nugent’s criteria
Local
adaptation
Desai et al.
(62)
India
Cross-
sectional
118
N. gonorrhoeae: 15.3
C. trachomatis: 8.5
T. vaginalis: 14.4
Red-light district
Sex workers
NACO 2
N. gonorrhoeae:
Culture and Gram
staining
C. trachomatis: Pace 2
C. trachomatis assay.
T. vaginalis: wet mount
+ speculum
exam
Francis et al.
(63)
United
Republic of
Tanzania
Cross-
sectional
966
N. gonorrhoeae: 4
C. trachomatis: 12
T. vaginalis: 19
Women working in
bars, hotels.
HIV-negative women
WHO 2
N. gonorrhoeae and
C. trachomatis: PCR
T. vaginalis: culture
Bacterial vaginosis:
Nugent’s criteria
History, risk
assessment
+ speculum
exam
Garcia et al.
(64)
Peru
Cross-
sectional
754
N. gonorrhoeae: 1.2
C. trachomatis: 6.8
Mothers’ Club
General population
Peruvian algorithm 1
N. gonorrhoeae and
C. trachomatis: PCR
History, risk
assessment
Kisa et al.
(57)
Turkey
Cross-
sectional
300
T. vaginalis: 14
Maternal health
clinic
Married women
WHO 2
T. vaginalis: Wet mount
History, risk
assessment
Lima et al.
(65)
Brazil
Cross-
sectional
104
T. vaginalis: 3.8
Bacterial vaginosis: 27.9
Antenatal care
Pregnant women
WHO 1
T. vaginalis: wet mount
Bacterial vaginosis:
Amsel criteria.
139
Annex 4. Evidence-to-decision table: vaginal discharge
Algorithm
Study
Country
Design
n
Prevalence (%)
Setting
Population
Flow chart
Reference test
+ speculum
exam
Lab (wet
mount,
gram stain)
Moherdaui
et al. (66)
Honduras
Cross-
sectional
933
N. gonorrhoeae and
C. trachomatis: 5.9
T. vaginalis: 6.8
Bacterial vaginosis: 27.4
General health
clinic
General population
WHO 1, 2, 3
N. gonorrhoeae: Gram
C. trachomatis:
immunofluorescence
T. vaginalis:
microscopy
History, risk
assessment
+ speculum
exam
Molaei et al.
(67)
Islamic
Republic of
Iran
Prospective
100
Bacterial vaginosis (GV):
14.0
T. vaginalis: 10.0
Hospital
gynaecological
outpatient
department
General population
married women
(18-49 years)
History;
History + bimanual and
speculum examination
(clinical diagnosis)
Bacterial vaginosis:
Amsel criteria +
Nugent score
T. vaginalis: wet
mount microscopy
Local
adaptation
Msuya et al.
(68)
United
Republic of
Tanzania
Cross-
sectional
2645
T. vaginalis: 5
Bacterial vaginosis: 20.9
Either: 23.9
Antenatal care
Pregnant women
Tanzanian STI case
management 2
T. vaginalis: wet
mount
Bacterial vaginosis:
Amsel Nugent.
Local
adaptation
Onyekownu
et al. (69)
Nigeria
Cross-
sectional
195
N. gonorrhoeae and
C. trachomatis: 12.8
Bacterial vaginosis and
T. vaginalis: 57.4
STI clinic
General population
Nigerian national
algorithm (2b)
N. gonorrhoeae:
Culture
C. trachomatis: Elisa
T. vaginalis: wet mount
Bacterial vaginosis:
Nugents criteria
History, risk
assessment
Romoren et
al. (70)
Botswana
Cross-
sectional
703
N. gonorrhoeae: 3
C. trachomatis: 8
T. vaginalis: 18.8
Bacterial vaginosis: 38.1
Antenatal care
Pregnant women
WHO 2
N. gonorrhoeae and
C. trachomatis: LCR
T. vaginalis: wet-mount
Bacterial vaginosis:
Nugent’s criteria
140
Guidelines for the management of symptomatic sexually transmitted infections
Algorithm
Study
Country
Design
n
Prevalence (%)
Setting
Population
Flow chart
Reference test
History, risk
assessment
Tann et al.
(71)
Uganda
Cross-
sectional
250
T. vaginalis: 17.3
Bacterial vaginosis: 47.7
Antenatal care
Pregnant women
Nigerian national
algorithm 2
T. vaginalis:
inoculation culture
media kit and wet
mount
Bacterial vaginosis:
Nugent’s criteria.
History, risk
assessment
Tolosa
et al. (3)
Colombia
Cross-
sectional
1266
N. gonorrhoeae: 1.2
C. trachomatis: 9
T. vaginalis: 0.9
Bacterial vaginosis: 39
General health
clinic
General population
WHO 1
N. gonorrhoeae and
C. trachomatis: PCR
T. vaginalis: wet mount
Bacterial vaginosis:
Nugent’s criteria
History, risk
assessment
+ speculum
exam
Vallely et al.
(72)
Papua New
Guinea
Cross-
sectional
1764
N. gonorrhoeae: 12.5
C. trachomatis: 16.9
T. vaginalis: 18.0
Antenatal clinics,
well-woman
clinics, sexual
health clinics
General population
women (18–59 years)
WHO history + risk
factors (antenatal clinic);
WHO history + risk factors
+ genital examination
(well-woman and sexual
health clinics)
N. gonorrhoeae and
C. trachomatis: real-
time PCR
T. vaginalis: real-time
PCR
141
Annex 4. Evidence-to-decision table: vaginal discharge
Table A4.5. Different flow charts and approaches modelled to manage
gonorrhoea and/or chlamydial infection among women with vaginal discharge
No treatment
Treat all
1a: 	 Risk assessment, then treat high-risk women for N. gonorrhoeae and C. trachomatis
2a: 	 Speculum examination then treat for N. gonorrhoeae and C. trachomatis if positive (presence of signs of cervicitis
– mucupus)
3a: 	 Speculum examination, treat for N. gonorrhoeae and C. trachomatis if positive, and if negative perform microscopy
(Gram stain) and if positive for presence of gram-negative diplococci or pus cell >20/hpf) treat for N. gonorrhoeae
and C. trachomatis
4:
Speculum examination, treat for N. gonorrhoeae and C. trachomatis if positive, and if negative perform point-of-
care test and if positive test, treat for N. gonorrhoeae and/or C. trachomatis
5:
Microscopy (Gram stain) then treat for N. gonorrhoeae and C. trachomatis if positive
6:
Risk assessment and/or genital examination then treat for N. gonorrhoeae and C. trachomatis if risk assessment
positive (context specific such as age) and/or genital examination positive (presence of vaginal discharge)
7:
Risk assessment and/or genital examination, if positive then perform speculum examination then treat for
N. gonorrhoeae and C. trachomatis if speculum positive
8:
Risk assessment and/or genital examination, if positive perform speculum examination then treat for
N. gonorrhoeae and C. trachomatis if speculum positive, if negative speculum perform microscopy then treat for
N. gonorrhoeae and C. trachomatis if positive
9:
Risk assessment and/or genital examination, if positive then perform low-cost point-of-care test then treat for
N. gonorrhoeae and/or C. trachomatis if positive point-of-care test
10a: 	Risk assessment then perform low-cost point-of-care test in women at high risk, then treat for N. gonorrhoeae and/
or C. trachomatis if positive point-of-care test
11a: 	Perform low-cost point-of-care test then treat for N. gonorrhoeae and/or C. trachomatis if positive point-of-care test
12: 	 Risk assessment and/or genital examination, if positive then perform high-cost point-of-care test then treat for
N. gonorrhoeae and/or C. trachomatis if positive point-of-care test
13a: 	Risk assessment then perform high-cost point-of-care test among women at high risk, then treat for N.
gonorrhoeae and/or C. trachomatis if positive point-of-care test
14a: 	Perform high-cost point-of-care test then treat for N. gonorrhoeae and/or C. trachomatis if positive point-of-care test
15: 	 WHO risk: low prevalence: risk assessment and/or speculum examination then treat for N. gonorrhoeae and
C. trachomatis if positive risk assessment and/or speculum; high prevalence: treat all for N. gonorrhoeae and
C. trachomatis
16: 	 WHO spec: low prevalence: genital examination, if positive for discharge then risk assessment, if high risk then
treat for N. gonorrhoeae and C. trachomatis; high prevalence: genital examination, if positive then treat for
N. gonorrhoeae and C. trachomatis
142
Guidelines for the management of symptomatic sexually transmitted infections
Table A4.6. Management of 1000 symptomatic women (5% and 20% prevalence of N. gonorrhoeae and C. trachomatis)
based on modelling
Certainty of the evidence (refer to the table above)
No
treatment
Treat
all
1a
2a
3a
4
5a
6
7
8
9
10a
11a
12
13a
14a
15
16
Sensitivity/specificity
0/100
100/0
63/60
73/56
87/41
95/50
52/73
92/12
92/12
73/76
92/12
87/41
92/12
80/90
63/60
80/90
80/90
92/12
95/98
63/60
95/98
95/98
L:90/34
H:100/0
L:49/68
H:78/20
5% prevalence
Infected and treated correctly
0
50
32
37
44
48
26
46
34
43
35
24
38
43
30
46
45
25
Moderate (due to some concern
about the risk of bias of studies)
Uninfected and treated
unnecessarily
0
950
380
418
561
475
257
836
371
561
159
72
180
33
15
38
627
304
Infected and not treated
50
0
19
14
7
3
24
4
17
7
15
26
12
7
20
3
5
26
Uninfected and not treated
950
0
570
532
390
475
694
114
580
390
791
878
770
917
935
912
323
646
Cases of pelvic inflammatory
disease
15
0
6
4
2
1
7
1
5
2
5
8
4
2
6
1
2
8
Cost per person for
antimicrobial resistance US$ 5
2.03
8.09
4.11
5.26
6.68
~5.38
4.79
7.30
~4.38
~5.79
4.82
3.09
5.25
15.08
7.83
16.89
6.67
3.72
20% prevalence
Infected and treated correctly
0
200
126
146
174
200
104
184
134
174
139
95
151
172
118
187
200
156
Moderate (due to some concern
with risk of bias of studies)
Uninfected and treated
unnecessarily
0
800
320
352
472
800
216
704
312
472
134
61
152
28
13
32
800
640
Infected and not treated
200
0
74
54
26
0
96
16
66
26
61
105
49
28
82
13
0
44
Uninfected and not treated
800
0
480
448
328
0
584
96
488
328
666
739
648
772
787
768
0
160
Cases of pelvic inflammatory
disease
60
0
22
16
8
0
29
5
20
8
18
31
15
8
25
4
0
13
Cost per person for
antimicrobial resistance US$ 5
7.75
8.09
6.50
7.15
7.76
~6.76
7.83
7.81
~7.07
~7.58
7.20
6.66
7.31
16.90
11.38
18.27
9.09
8.14
Dark green: best benefit; light green: less benefit; yellow: harm; red: most harm.
Estimates from modelling for N. gonorrhoeae or C. trachomatis
143
ANNEX 5. EVIDENCE-TO-DECISION TABLE:
LOWER ABDOMINAL PAIN
Should the current WHO syndromic management be
recommended versus laboratory diagnosis, no treatment or
treat all to identify pelvic inflammatory disease caused by
STIs among women with lower abdominal pain?
Population:
Women presenting with lower abdominal
pain
Intervention and comparator:
Intervention: current WHO syndromic
approach versus comparison: laboratory
diagnosis (or no treatment or treat all)
Purpose of the test:
To identify women for treatment of STIs
related to pelvic inflammatory disease
Linked treatments:
Treatment for infections caused by
C. trachomatis, N. gonorrhoeae,
T. vaginalis and anaerobic infections
Anticipated outcomes:
Number of people identified correctly as
having or not having STI and/or pelvic
inflammatory disease; number of people
identified incorrectly as having or not
having STI and/or pelvic inflammatory
disease; consequences of appropriate
or inappropriate treatment; patient and
provider acceptability, feasibility, equity
and resource use
Setting:
Outpatient
Perspective:
Population level
Subgroups:
Pregnant women, sex workers and
heterosexual women (general population).
Background:
Syndromic management refers to a
strategy for identifying and treating STIs
based on specific syndromes (symptoms
identified by a patient) and signs (clinically
observed signs of infection) associated
with clearly defined causes. Although
etiological diagnosis is preferred, it is not
always accessible or affordable.
Individuals presenting with lower
abdominal pain syndrome could suggest
the presence of acute pelvic inflammatory
disease that requires immediate attention.
Lower abdominal pain is a vague symptom
and can be caused by myriad potential
diseases, including pelvic inflammatory
disease with consequent risk of chronic
pelvic pain, tubal factor infertility and
ectopic pregnancy. Pelvic inflammatory
disease represents a spectrum of disease
with a wide range of severity and results
from an infection from the cervix or vagina
entering into the endometrium, fallopian
tubes and/or contiguous structures. Pelvic
inflammatory disease is a polymicrobial
infection and can be caused by an STI or
by dysbiosis of the vaginal microbiome.
The likely causes of lower abdominal pain
could change depending on the age of the
woman.
WHO published clinical guidelines for the
syndromic management of lower abdominal
pain syndrome in 2003 (Fig. A5.1).
144
Guidelines for the management of symptomatic sexually transmitted infections
Assessment
Judgement
Research evidence
Problem
Is the problem a priority?
No
Probably no
Probably yes
Yes
Varies
Don’t know
There is currently no objective test for pelvic inflammatory disease, and
symptoms can vary widely from severe to none. Clinical diagnosis involves
bimanual examination of the cervix and uterus to detect tenderness among
women presenting with acute lower pelvic pain, fever and vaginal or cervical
discharge. The procedure is uncomfortable, invasive and subjective, thereby
presenting a significant barrier to clinicians and women. Pelvic inflammatory
disease cases could be missed and may increase women’s risk of ectopic
pregnancy and infertility. Laparoscopic examination is considered the
gold standard for diagnosing pelvic inflammatory disease (or endometrial
biopsy. transvaginal sonography, magnetic resonance imaging techniques
or Doppler studies) but, because of their impracticality as a screening tool,
until more accurate diagnostics are available, clinicians are advised to have
a low threshold for syndromic management for suspected cases of pelvic
inflammatory disease.
High cost of molecular STI testing
There is a need for cheaper platforms, near-patient or point-of-care tests for C.
trachomatis and N. gonorrhoeae and potentially for M. genitalium.
Antimicrobial resistance
There is increasing concern about the treatment of people with
N. gonorrhoeae, since high rates of resistance to penicillin, tetracycline and
quinolone have been documented globally. Resistance to commonly used first-
line medications (azithromycin) and reports of treatment failure or reduced
susceptibility in N. gonorrhoeae to cephalosporin (a last-line treatment for N.
gonorrhoeae) raise concern that N. gonorrhoeae could become untreatable.
Test accuracy
How accurate is the test?
Very inaccurate
Inaccurate
Accurate
Very accurate
Varies
Don’t know
We systematically reviewed the literature, searching up to September 2019. In
summary, we identified five studies that assessed the diagnostic accuracy of
lower abdominal pain syndromic management to detect any STI (Table A5.1),
five studies for genital chlamydia (Table A5.2) and four studies for genital
gonorrhoea (Table A5.3) and three studies for genital trichomoniasis (Table
A5.4).
For detection of any STI (chlamydia, gonorrhoea or trichomoniasis), five
studies provided eight estimates for pooling. The pooled sensitivity for
detecting chlamydia, gonorrhoea or trichomonas using a syndromic
management approach (lower abdominal pain) is 30.0% (95% CI: 17.7–
46.0%), and pooled specificity is 73.3% (95% CI: 56.3–85.4%).
145
Annex 5. Evidence-to-decision table: lower abdominal pain
Judgement
Research evidence
Test accuracy
Table A5.5. GRADE summary of findings table for
abdominal pain and any STI
Test result
Number of
results per 1000
people tested
(95% confidence
interval)
Number of
participants
(studies)
Certainty
of the
evidence
(GRADE)
Prevalence of 5%
typically seen in:
True positives
15 (9–23)
3908 (5)
False negatives
35 (27–41)
High
True negatives
696 (535–811)
3908 (5)
False positives
254 (139–415)
Moderatea,b
a Most studies showed consistent results.
b The threshold for unnecessary treatment was high (about 75%), and the
confidence intervals cross that threshold and there is therefore some imprecision
for false positives.
Accuracy of criteria for pelvic inflammatory disease in the WHO
syndromic management flow chart (also similar to the minimal criteria
of the United States Centers for Disease Control and Prevention)
The value of various clinical characteristics to identify pelvic inflammatory
disease has been studied among 651 women in the United States of America
(PEACH Study) (1).
Table A5.6. Diagnostic test characteristics of
clinical signs of pelvic inflammatory disease
Clinical
characteristic
Sensitivity in %
(95% confidence
interval)
Specificity in %
(95% confidence
interval)
Abdominal tenderness
93.9 (90.6–96.3)
7.4 (4.8–10.7)
Cervical motion
tenderness
91.6 (88.0–94.5)
12.6 (9.1–16.7)
Uterine tenderness
94.2 (91.0–96.6)
5.3 (3.1–8.2)
Adnexal tenderness
95.5 (92.6–97.5)
3.8 (2.1–6.5)
Minimal criteria of the
United States Centers
for Disease Control and
Prevention
83.3 (78.7–87.3)
21.8 (17.5–26.5)
Source: Peipert et al. (1).
146
Guidelines for the management of symptomatic sexually transmitted infections
Judgement
Research evidence
Test accuracy
Table A5.7. Evaluation of supportive criteria for
diagnosing endometritis
Clinical
characteristic
Sensitivity in %
(95% confidence
interval)
Specificity in %
(95% confidence
interval)
Positive likelihood
ratio
Negative likelihood
ratio
Measure of
separation (95%
confidence interval)a
Abnormal
cervical
or vaginal
discharge
79.7
(74.6–84.2)
29.8
(24.8–35.2)
1.14
0.681
1.67
(1.15–2.43)
Elevated
body
temperature
(>38°C)
11.1
(7.8–15.2)
94.7
(91.7–96.9)
2.09
0.939
2.25
(1.23–4.13)
Elevated
leukocyte
count
(≥10 000
cells)
41.1
(35.1–47.3)
76.1
(70.6–81.0)
1.72
0.774
2.22
(1.54–3.22)
Positive
bacterial
resultsb
56.0
(50.2–61.6)
81.6
(77.0–85.6)
3.04
0.539
5.64
(3.94–8.06)
a Positive likelihood ratio/negative likelihood ratio.
b Polymerase chain reaction testing for N. gonorrhoeae or C. trachomatis.
Table A5.8. GRADE summary of findings table for
the minimal criteria of the United States Centers
for Disease Control and Prevention (tenderness)
and detection of pelvic inflammatory disease
based on sensitivity 83.8% and specificity 21.8%
Test result
Number of
results per 1000
people tested
(95% CI)
Number of
participants
(studies)
Certainty
of the
evidence
(GRADE)
Prevalence of 5%
typically seen in:
True positives
42 (39–44)
651
(1)
False negatives
8 (6–11)
Moderatea
True negatives
207 (166–252)
651
(1)
False positives
743 (698–784)
Moderatea
CI: confidence interval.
a Most studies showed consistent results.
Single study sensitivity: 0.84 (95% CI: 0.79–0.87)
Single study specificity: 0.22 (95% CI: 0.17–0.27)
147
Annex 5. Evidence-to-decision table: lower abdominal pain
Judgement
Research evidence
Test accuracy
Other criteria to identify pelvic inflammatory disease
A study of 189 women clinically diagnosed with pelvic inflammatory disease
from a hospital outpatient setting in Sweden reported the sensitivity of various
symptoms and signs – tenderness of pelvic organs on bimanual exam. Laparoscopic
confirmation of pelvic inflammatory disease was not conducted for these women (2).
Table A5.9. Prediction of laparoscopically
diagnosed PID: sensitivity and specificity of signs
and symptoms, likelihood ratios and port-test
probabilities (pretest probability = 79%)
Signs and
symptoms
Sensitivity (%)
Specificity (%)
Laparoscopically
diagnosed PID
Likelihood ratio*
(Positive)
Post-test probability
Present
(n=494)
Absent
(n=129)
(95% CI)
(95% CI)
No (%)
No (%)
Vaginal discharge
74
(69.99–77.90)
24
(16.95–32.34)
366 (74)
98 (76)
0.98
0.79
Fever
47
(42.49–51.47)
64
(55.43–72.58)
234 (47)
47 (36)
1.30
0.83
Vomiting
14
(11.03–17.34)
88
(81.55–93.34)
68 (14)
16 (12)
1.11
0.81
Menstrual
irregularity
45
(40.49–49.45)
57
(48.36–66.03)
223 (45)
56 (43)
1.04
0.80
Ongoing bleeding
25
(21.24–29.17)
77
(68.49–83.73)
124 (25)
29 (22)
1.12
0.81
Urinary symptoms
35
(30.81–39.41)
64
(55.43–72.58)
173 (35)
46 (36)
0.98
0.79
Proctitis symptoms
10
(7.43–12.90)
92
(86.21–96.22)
50 (10)
10 (8)
1.31
0.83
Tenderness of pelvic
organs on bimanual
examination
99
(97.65–99.67)
0.007
(<0.001–2.84)
489 (99)
128 (99)
1.00
0.79
Palpable adnexal
mass or swelling
52
(47.52–56.51)
70
(61.06–77.54)
258 (52)
39 (30)
1.73
0.84
Erythrocyte
sedimentation rate
≥15mm in 1st hour
81
(77.23–84.34)
33
(25.28–42.17)
402 (81)
86 (66)
1.22
0.82
*Likelihood ratio interpretation: >10 and <0.1 (large difference between pretest and post-test
probability), 5-10 and 0.1-0.2 (moderate), 2-5 and 0.5-0.2 (small), 1-2 and 0.05-1 (small and
rarely important).
For detection of chlamydia only, four estimates for the accuracy of lower abdominal
pain to detect chlamydia were available to pool. The pooled sensitivity for detecting
chlamydia using a syndromic management approach (lower abdominal pain) is
48.0% (95% CI: 24.0–73.0), and pooled specificity is 61.7% (95% CI: 41.9–78.3).
For detection of trichomonas only, four estimates for the accuracy of lower
abdominal pain to detect Trichomonas were available to pool. The pooled
sensitivity for detecting Trichomonas using a syndromic management approach
(lower abdominal pain) is 39.7% (95% CI: 19.6–63.9), and pooled specificity is
60.6% (95% CI: 41.0–77.4).
Other infections
About half of diagnosed pelvic inflammatory disease cases are caused by an STI
such as chlamydia, gonorrhoea or M. genitalium infection (3). In the remaining
cases, a specific cause is unclear, although pelvic inflammatory disease is
polymicrobial (4). [Sharma 2014] There is evidence linking idiopathic pelvic
inflammatory disease to vaginal microbiota dysbiosis, including recent bacterial
vaginosis (a dysbiotic condition), and bacterial vaginosis organisms have been
detected among women with pelvic inflammatory disease (5–7).
148
Guidelines for the management of symptomatic sexually transmitted infections
Judgement
Research evidence
Desirable effects
How substantial are the
desirable anticipated
effects of syndromic
approach?
Trivial
Small
Moderate
Large
Varies
Don’t know
Desirable effects
Consequences of appropriate treatment (true positive)
Immediate treatment of an acute pelvic inflammatory disease may avert adverse
consequences such as chronic pelvic pain, ectopic pregnancy and infertility.
Consequences of appropriate treatment (true negative)
Alternative diagnoses possible
Psychological benefit
Undesirable effects
Consequences of missed cases (false negative)
Onward transmission of STIs
Cost of “wrong” treatment
Vulnerability to HIV
Pelvic inflammatory disease and its sequelae
Loss of confidence in the health system if inappropriately managed
Burden of STIs
Consequences of unnecessary treatment (false positive)
Cost of treatment (side-effects)
Potential stigma or relationship strain
Antimicrobial resistance (especially N. gonorrhoeae)
Loss of confidence in the health system if inappropriately managed
Delayed management of the true cause of disease
When treatment is based on the syndromic approach, most women with
pelvic inflammatory disease were identified with pelvic inflammatory disease,
and there were few missed cases (8 of 1000 women with abdominal pain)
compared with not assessing for pelvic inflammatory disease, although many
women were overtreated.
Undesirable effects
How substantial are the
undesirable anticipated
effects?
Large
Moderate
Small
Trivial
Varies
Don’t know
Certainty of the evidence
of test accuracy
What is the overall
certainty of the evidence of
test accuracy?
Very low
Low
Moderate
High
No included studies
Certainty of the evidence of the
effects of management
What is the overall
certainty of the
evidence of effects of
the management that
is guided by the test
results?
Very low
Low
Moderate
High
No included studies
The evidence for management was based on current WHO recommendations
for treating women with pelvic inflammatory disease.
149
Annex 5. Evidence-to-decision table: lower abdominal pain
Judgement
Research evidence
Certainty of effects
What is the overall
certainty of the evidence
of effects of the test?
Very low
Low
Moderate
High
No included studies
Values
Is there important
uncertainty about or
variability in how much
people value the main
outcomes?
Important uncertainty or
variability
Possibly important
uncertainty or variability
Probably no important
uncertainty or variability
No important uncertainty
or variability
Higher value was placed on missing women with pelvic inflammatory disease
based on the consequences of missing treatment for pelvic inflammatory
disease (including damage to the reproductive tract). Value (although less)
was placed on reducing the risk of onward transmission of STIs.
Pelvic inflammatory disease after three years of follow-up: 18% infertility,
0.6% ectopic pregnancy, 29% chronic pelvic inflammatory disease (PEACH
study (1))
Balance of effects
Does the balance
between desirable and
undesirable effects favour
the intervention or the
comparison?
Favours the comparison
Probably favours the
comparison
Does not favour either
the intervention or the
comparison
Probably favours the
intervention
Favours the intervention
Varies
Don’t know
There were few missed cases with a syndromic approach to lower abdominal
pain, which was heavily valued. Although many women were treated
unnecessarily, little value was placed on the overtreatment due to minimal
side-effects.
Therefore, assessing for pelvic inflammatory disease and managing
syndromically was favoured over no treatment.
Resources required
How large are the resource
requirements (costs)?
Large costs
Moderate costs
Negligible costs and savings
Moderate savings
Large savings
Varies
Don’t know
We did not identify any published cost analysis related to lower abdominal
pain syndrome.
The average cost of pelvic inflammatory disease = £163 (range £96–960) (8).
Average lifetime cost of pelvic inflammatory disease =US$ 2400 (9).
There was little difference in costs between treating all or not treating or
assessing for pelvic inflammatory disease, although greater costs if molecular
testing was used.
150
Guidelines for the management of symptomatic sexually transmitted infections
Judgement
Research evidence
Certainty of evidence of
required resources
What is the certainty of
the evidence of resource
requirements (costs)?
Very low
Low
Moderate
High
No included studies
Cost–effectiveness
Does the cost–
effectiveness of the
intervention favour
the intervention or the
comparison?
Favours the comparison
Probably favours the
comparison
Does not favour either
the intervention or the
comparison
Probably favours the
intervention
Favours the intervention
Varies
No included studies
A pharmacist-managed syndromic intervention in Lima, Peru resulted in an
estimated cost savings of US$1.51 per case adequately managed using a
societal perspective (10). This was primarily driven by the assumption that
pharmacists will prescribe medications that are more effective and less costly
compared with pharmacies in the control districts. However, this study did not
truly have a societal perspective, only considering the medication cost but no
other societal costs (includes women with vaginal discharge, lower abdominal
pain – data not disaggregated for pelvic inflammatory disease syndrome).
The Guideline Development Group agreed that, based on cost–effectiveness,
assessing for pelvic inflammatory disease and managing syndromically is
favoured rather than no assessment, treating all or molecular testing.
Equity
What would be the impact
on health equity?
Reduced
Probably reduced
Probably no impact
Probably increased
Increased
Varies
Don’t know
We identified no studies.
Acceptability
Is the intervention
acceptable to key
stakeholders?
No
Probably no
Probably yes
Yes
Varies
Don’t know
Clinicians
We found poor provider adherence to recommended guidelines for diagnosing
pelvic inflammatory disease. For example, only 70% of women attending STI
clinics in the United States of America (2010–2011) who were diagnosed as
having pelvic inflammatory disease met the criteria for pelvic inflammatory
disease in accordance with the guidelines of the United States Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention (11).
Patients
We did not find any studies discussing the acceptability of syndromic
management of lower abdominal pain.
151
Annex 5. Evidence-to-decision table: lower abdominal pain
Judgement
Research evidence
Feasibility
Is the intervention feasible
to implement?
No
Probably no
Probably yes
Yes
Varies
Don’t know
A randomized controlled trial of the feasibility and acceptability for pharmacy
workers to recognize and manage STI syndromes was conducted in Lima,
Peru (12). Standardized simulated patients visited the pharmacies in the
control and intervention districts and found that pharmacy workers in the
intervention districts were significantly better at recognizing and managing the
STI syndromes (including pelvic inflammatory disease) – adequate for 61% of
pharmacies in the intervention arm versus 19% in the control arm for pelvic
inflammatory disease.
However, the syndromic approach relies on the patient recognizing the
symptoms (to seek consultation with a health-care provider) and the skill of
the health-care provider in adequately managing a woman with lower
abdominal pain.
Pelvic inflammatory disease diagnosis such as laparoscopy, ultrasound and
magnetic resonance imaging – not available in primary or secondary health care
in resource -limited settings.
152
Guidelines for the management of symptomatic sexually transmitted infections
Summary of judgements
Judgement
Problem
No
Probably no
Probably
yes
Yes
Varies
Don’t know
Test accuracy
Very
inaccurate
Inaccurate
Accurate
Very
accurate
Varies
Don’t know
Desirable
effects
Trivial
Small
Moderate
Large
Varies
Don’t know
Undesirable
effects
Large
Moderate
Small
Trivial
Varies
Don’t know
Certainty of
the evidence of
test accuracy
Very low
Low
Moderate
High
No included
studies
Certainty of
the evidence of
the effects of
management
Very low
Low
Moderate
High
No included
studies
Certainty of
effects
Very low
Low
Moderate
High
No included
studies
Values
Important
uncertainty
or
variability
Possibly
important
uncertainty
or
variability
Probably no
important
uncertainty
or
variability
No
important
uncertainty
or
variability
Balance of
effects
Favours the
comparison
Probably
favours the
comparison
Does not
favour
either the
intervention
or the
comparison
Probably
favours the
intervention
Favours the
intervention
Varies
Don’t know
Resources
required
Large costs
Moderate
costs
Negligible
costs and
savings
Moderate
savings
Large
savings
Varies
Don’t know
Certainty
of evidence
of required
resources
Very low
Low
Moderate
High
No included
studies
Cost–
effectiveness
Favours the
comparison
Probably
favours the
comparison
Does not
favour
either the
intervention
or the
comparison
Probably
favours the
intervention
Favours the
intervention
Varies
No included
studies
Equity
Reduced
Probably
reduced
Probably no
impact
Probably
increased
Increased
Varies
Don’t know
Acceptability
No
Probably no
Probably
yes
Yes
Varies
Don’t know
Feasibility
No
Probably no
Probably
yes
Yes
Varies
Don’t know
153
Annex 5. Evidence-to-decision table: lower abdominal pain
Conclusions
Should the current WHO syndromic management be recommended versus
laboratory diagnosis, no treatment or treat all to identify pelvic inflammatory
disease caused by STIs among women with lower abdominal pain?
Type of
recommendation
Strong
recommendation
against the
intervention
Conditional
recommendation
against the
intervention
Conditional
recommendation for
either the intervention
or the comparison
Conditional
recommendation
for the
intervention
Strong
recommendation
for the intervention
Recommendation
Recommendations for management of women with lower abdominal pain
For sexually active women with symptom of lower abdominal pain, we suggest assessing for pelvic
inflammatory disease and treating syndromically.
Good practice includes:
•	 taking a medical and sexual history and assessing the risk of STIs;
•	 performing a physical examination, including abdominal and pelvic examination, to assess for
pelvic inflammatory disease, surgical conditions or pregnancy and vulvovaginal examination to
visualize any lesions, overt genital discharge, vulval erythema and excoriations;
•	 performing a bimanual digital examination of the vagina to (1) assess for cervical motion
tenderness or pain with palpation of the pelvic area to exclude pelvic inflammatory disease; and
(2) assess for the presence of vaginal discharge and the colour and consistency of the discharge
on the glove; and
•	 offering HIV and syphilis testing and other preventive services as recommended in other
guidelines.
For sexually active women with lower abdominal pain with either of the following features on
clinical examination (bimanual palpation):
•	 cervical motion tenderness; or
•	 lower abdominal tenderness:
We suggest the following.
1.	Treat for pelvic inflammatory disease on the same visit.
2.	Test for infection with N. gonorrhoeae and C. trachomatis and, if available, M. genitalium, to
support partner management when tests are available.
3.	Schedule follow-up assessment in three days to assess for clinical improvement, and if the
woman has not improved, refer for further assessment.
For women with lower abdominal pain with any of the following conditions, good practice includes
referral to surgical or gynaecological assessment:
•	 missed or overdue period;
•	 recent delivery, abortion or miscarriage;
•	 abdominal guarding and/or rebound tenderness;
•	 abnormal vaginal bleeding in excess of spotting;
•	 abdominal mass; and
•	 detection of a suspected cervical lesion.
Justification
Managing people presenting with lower abdominal pain based on a syndromic approach results
in moderate benefits and little harm compared with treating all or no treatment. The syndromic
approach would be feasible and acceptable and would not negatively affect equity (in some
settings it may increase equity) and incur negligible costs.
154
Guidelines for the management of symptomatic sexually transmitted infections
Fig. A5.1. Current WHO syndromic management guidelines for lower
abdominal pain
Continure treatment until completed
• Educate and council
• Promote condom use and provide condoms
• Offer HIV counselling and testing if both facilities are available
• Ask patient to return if necessary
Take history (including gynaecological)
and examine (abdominal and vaginal)
Person with symptom of lower abdominal pain
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Refer patient for surgical or gynaecological
opinion and assessment.
Before referral set up an IV line and apply
resuscitatory measures if necessary
Manage for PID
Review in 3 days
Manage
appropriately
Refer
Any of the following present?
•	Missed/overdue period
•	Recent delivery/abortion/miscarriage
•	Abdominal guarding and/or rebound
tenderness
•	Abnormal vaginal bleeding
•	Abdominal mass
No
No
No
Is there cervical excitation
tenderness, or lower
abdominal tenderness
and vaginal discharge?
Any other
illness found?
Patient has improved?
155
Annex 5. Evidence-to-decision table: lower abdominal pain
References
1.	 Peipert JF, Ness RB, Blume J, Soper DE, Holley R, Randall H et al. Clinical predictors of
endometritis in women with symptoms and signs of pelvic inflammatory disease. Am J
Obstet Gynecol. 2001;184:856–63.
2.	 Eggert J, Sundquist K, van Vuuren C, Fianu-Jonasson A. The clinical diagnosis of pelvic
inflammatory disease – reuse of electronic medical record data from 189 patients visiting a
Swedish university hospital emergency department. BMC Women’s Health. 2006;6:16.
3.	 Goller JL, De Livera AM, Fairley CK, Guy RJ, Bradshaw CS, Chen MY et al. Population
attributable fraction of pelvic inflammatory disease associated with chlamydia and
gonorrhoea: a cross-sectional analysis of Australian sexual health clinic data. Sex Transm
Infect. 2016;92:525–31.
4.	 Sharma H, Tal R, Clark NA, Segars JH. Microbiota and pelvic inflammatory disease. Semin
Reprod Med. 2014;32:43–9.
5.	 Wang Y, Zhang Y, Zhang Q, Chen H, Feng Y. Characterization of pelvic and cervical
microbiotas from patients with pelvic inflammatory disease. J Med Microbiol.
2018;67:1519–26.
6.	 Ness RB, Hillier SL, Kip KE, Soper DE, Stamm CA, McGregor JA et al. Bacterial vaginosis
and risk of pelvic inflammatory disease. Obstet Gynecol. 2004;104:761–9.
7.	 Ness RB, Kip KE, Hillier SL, Soper DE, Stamm CA, Sweet RL et al. A cluster analysis
of bacterial vaginosis–associated microflora and pelvic inflammatory disease. Am J
Epidemiol. 2005;162:585–90.
8.	 Aghaizu A, Adams EJ, Turner K, Kerry S, Hay P, Simms I et al. What is the cost of pelvic
inflammatory disease and how much could be prevented by screening for Chlamydia
trachomatis? Cost analysis of the Prevention of Pelvic Infection (POPI) trial. Sex Transm
Infect. 2011;87:312–7.
9.	 Yeh JM, Hook EW 3rd, Goldie SJ. A refined estimate of the average lifetime cost of pelvic
inflammatory disease. Sex Transm Dis. 2003;30:369–78.
10.	 Adams EJ, Garcia PJ, Garnett GP, Edmunds WJ, Holmes KK. The cost–effectiveness of
syndromic management in pharmacies in Lima, Peru. Sex Transm Dis. 2003;30:379–87.
11.	 Llata E, Bernstein KT, Kerani RP, Pathela P, Schwebke JR, Schumacher C et al. Management
of pelvic inflammatory disease in selected U.S. sexually transmitted disease clinics:
Sexually Transmitted Disease Surveillance Network, January 2010–December 2011. Sex
Transm Dis. 2015;42:429–33.
12.	 Garcia P, Hughes J, Carcamo C, Holmes KK. Training pharmacy workers in recognition,
management and prevention of, STDs: district-randomized controlled trial. Bull World
Health Organ. 2003;81:806–14.
156
Guidelines for the management of symptomatic sexually transmitted infections
13.	 Wilkinson D, Sturm AW. Value of clinical algorithms to screen for gonococcal and
chlamydial infection among women attending antenatal and family planning clinics. S Afr
Med J. 1998;88(7 Suppl. 1):900–5.
14.	 Alary M, Laga M, Vuylsteke B, Nzila N, Piot P. Signs and symptoms of prevalent and
incident cases of gonorrhea and genital chlamydial infection among female prostitutes in
Kinshasa, Zaire. Clin Infect Dis. 1996;22:477–84.
15.	 Meda N, Sangaré L, Lankoandé S, Sanou PT, Compaoré PI, Catraye J et al. Pattern of
sexually transmitted diseases among pregnant women in Burkina Faso, west Africa:
potential for a clinical management based on simple approaches. Genitourin Med.
1997;73:188–93.
16.	 Piper JM, Korte JE, Holden AE, Shain RN, Perdue S, Champion JD, Newton ER.
Development of composite symptom variables for quantitative analysis of genitourinary
symptomatology in women. Int J STD AIDS. 2005;16:128–32.
17.	 Vallely LM, Toliman P, Ryan C, Rai G, Wapling J, Gabuzzi J et al. Performance of syndromic
management for the detection and treatment of genital Chlamydia trachomatis, Neisseria
gonorrhoeae and Trichomonas vaginalis among women attending antenatal, well woman
and sexual health clinics in Papua New Guinea: a cross-sectional study. BMJ Open.
2017;7:e018630.
18.	 Wiesenfeld HC, Hillier SL, Krohn MA, Amortegui AJ, Heine RP, Landers DV et al. Lower
genital tract infection and endometritis: insight into subclinical pelvic inflammatory
disease. Obstet Gynecol. 2002;100:456–63.
19.	 Woods JL, Scurlock AM, Hensel DJ. Pelvic inflammatory disease in the adolescent:
understanding diagnosis and treatment as a health care provider. Pediatr Emerg Care.
2013;29:720–5.
20.	 Cohen CR, Manhart LE, Bukusi EA, Astete S, Brunham RC, Holmes KK et al. Association
between Mycoplasma genitalium and acute endometritis. Lancet. 2002;359:765–6.
21.	 Grio R, Latino MA, Leotta E, Smirne C, Lanza A, Spagnolo E et al. Sexually transmitted
diseases and pelvic inflammatory disease. Minerva Ginecolog. 2004;56:141–7.
157
Annex 5. Evidence-to-decision table: lower abdominal pain
Table A5.1. Detection of any STIs for lower abdominal pain syndrome
Algorithm
Year of
study
Country
Country
income
level
Sample
size
Where
recruited
Sub-
population
How a
positive
case is
defined
Pathogen, diagnostic
True
positive
False
negative
False
positive
True
negative
Wilkinson
& Sturm
(13)
1998
South Africa
Upper
middle
268
Antenatal
clinic
100%
pregnant
women
Symptoms
only
C. trachomatis and N. gonorrhoeae
C. trachomatis = direct
immunofluorescence
N. gonorrhoeae = culture
13
38
48
170
Wilkinson
& Sturm
(13)
1998
South Africa
Upper
middle
190
Family
planning
clinic
100%
women
Symptoms
only
C. trachomatis and N. gonorrhoeae
C. trachomatis = direct
immunofluorescence
N. gonorrhoeae = culture
3
18
5
163
Alary et al.
(14)
1988–
1991
Zaire
Low
771
Unclear
100%
female sex
workers
Symptoms
only
C. trachomatis and N. gonorrhoeae
C. trachomatis = enzyme immunoassay
N. gonorrhoeae = culture
100
125
217
329
Meda et al.
(15)
1994
Burkina Faso
Low
397
Antenatal
care
100%
pregnant
women
Symptoms
only
C. trachomatis and N. gonorrhoeae
C. trachomatis = enzyme immunoassay
N. gonorrhoeae = culture
8
22
113
254
Piper et al.
(16)
Unclear
United
States
High
518
Public
health
clinic
100% ethnic
minority
women
Symptoms
only
C. trachomatis, and N. gonorrhoeae
and T. vaginalis
C. trachomatis and N. gonorrhoeae =
NAAT (GenProbe)
T. vaginalis = culture
106
279
20
113
Vallely et
al. (17)
2011–
2015
Papua
New Guinea
Lower
middle
765
Antenatal
clinic
100%
pregnant
women
Symptoms
only
C. trachomatis, N. gonorrhoeae and
T. vaginalis
NAAT
60
267
106
332
Vallely et
al. (17)
2011–
2015
Papua
New Guinea
Lower
middle
614
Well-
woman
clinic
100%
women
Symptoms
only
C. trachomatis, N. gonorrhoeae and
T. vaginalis
NAAT
46
108
154
306
Vallely et
al. (17)
2011–
2015
Papua
New Guinea
Lower
middle
385
Sexual
health
clinic
100%
women
Symptoms
only
C. trachomatis, N. gonorrhoeae and
T. vaginalis
NAAT
109
36
173
67
158
Guidelines for the management of symptomatic sexually transmitted infections
Table A5.2. Detection of gonorrhoea for lower abdominal pain syndrome
Study
Year of
study
Country
Country
income
level
Sample
size
Where recruited
Subpopulation
How a positive case
is defined
Diagnostic
True
positive
False
negative
False
positive
True
negative
Wiesenfeld
et al. (18)
1998–
2000
United
States
High
427
Hospital, sexual
health clinic,
ambulatory care
sites
Excluded acute pelvic
inflammatory disease
Subclinical pelvic
inflammatory disease
(endometrial biopsy)
Culture
15
26
57
329
Woods et
al (19)
2013
United
States
High
150
General practice,
emergency
department
100% diagnosed with
pelvic inflammatory
disease
Pelvic inflammatory
disease diagnosis
according to ICD
criteria (symptoms +
examination)
Unclear
19
6
98
27
Vallely et
al. (17)
2011–
2015
Papua
New Guinea
Lower
middle
765
Antenatal clinic
100% pregnant
women
Symptoms only
PCR
15
94
151
505
Vallely et
al. (17)
2011–
2015
Papua
New Guinea
Lower
middle
614
Well-woman clinic
100% women
Symptoms only
PCR
15
34
185
380
Vallely et
al. (17)
2011–
2015
Papua
New Guinea
Lower
middle
385
Sexual health
clinic
100% women
Symptoms only
PCR
46
17
236
86
Cohen et
al. (20)
Unclear
Kenya
Lower
middle
115
Sexual health
clinic
100% had pelvic pain
(14 days or less)
Endometritis
(endometrial biopsy)
PCR
9
4
49
53
159
Annex 5. Evidence-to-decision table: lower abdominal pain
Table A5.3. Detection of chlamydia for lower abdominal pain syndrome
Study
Year of
study
Country
Country
income
level
Sample
size
Where recruited
Subpopulation
How a positive case
is defined
Diagnostic
True
positive
False
negative
False
positive
True
negative
Wiesenfeld
et al. (18)
1998–
2000
United
States
High
403
Hospital, sexual
health clinic,
ambulatory care
sites
Excluded acute pelvic
inflammatory disease
Subclinical pelvic
inflammatory disease
(endometrial biopsy)
PCR
27
44
46
286
Woods et
al. (19)
2013
United
States
High
150
General practice,
emergency
department
100% diagnosed with
pelvic inflammatory
disease
Pelvic inflammatory
disease diagnosis
according to ICD
criteria (symptoms +
examination)
Unclear
31
14
86
19
Vallely et
al. (17)
2011–
2015
Papua
New Guinea
Lower
middle
765
Antenatal clinic
100% pregnant
women
Symptoms only
PCR
30
145
136
454
Vallely et
al. (17)
2011–
2015
Papua
New Guinea
Lower
middle
614
Well-woman clinic
100% women
Symptoms only
PCR
19
27
181
387
Vallely et
al. (17)
2011–
2015
Papua
New Guinea
Lower
middle
385
Sexual health
clinic
100% women
Symptoms only
PCR
62
16
220
87
Cohen et
al. (20)
Unclear
Kenya
Lower
middle
115
Sexual health
clinic
100% had pelvic pain
(14 days or less)
Pelvic inflammatory
disease (endometrial
biopsy)
4
2
54
55
Grio et al.
(21)
1997–
2001
Italy
High
5026
Hospital
Symptomatic for
pelvic inflammatory
disease
LCR using
Abbot LCx
system
49
38
1505
3434
160
Guidelines for the management of symptomatic sexually transmitted infections
Table A5.4. Detection of trichomoniasis for lower abdominal pain syndrome
Study
Year of
study
Country
Country
income
level
Sample
size
Where recruited
Subpopulation
How a positive case
is defined
Diagnostic
True
positive
False
negative
False
positive
True
negative
Wiesenfeld
et al. (18)
1998–
2000
United
States
High
428
Hospital, sexual
health clinic,
ambulatory care
sites
Excluded acute pelvic
inflammatory disease
Women 15–30 years
old
Subclinical pelvic
inflammatory disease
(endometrial biopsy)
Culture
14
35
60
319
Vallely et
al. (17)
2011–
2015
Papua
New Guinea
Lower
middle
765
Antenatal clinic
100% pregnant
women
Symptoms only
29
142
137
457
Vallely et
al. (17)
2011–
2015
Papua
New Guinea
Lower
middle
614
Well-woman clinic
100% women
Symptoms only
24
68
176
346
Vallely et
al. (17)
2011–
2015
Papua
New Guinea
Lower
middle
385
Sexual health
clinic
100% women
Symptoms only
40
14
242
89
Grio et al.
(21)
1997-
2001
Italy
High
5516
Hospital
100% women
Symptomatic for
pelvic inflammatory
disease
LCR using
Abbot LCx
system
23
22
1697
3774
161
ANNEX 6. EVIDENCE-TO-DECISION TABLE:
GENITAL ULCER DISEASE
Should current WHO syndromic management be
recommended versus laboratory diagnosis, no treatment
or treat all to identify sexually transmitted infections
among people with anogenital ulcers?
Population:
Individuals presenting with anogenital
ulcers
Intervention and comparator:
Intervention: syndromic management
approach versus comparison: laboratory
diagnosis (or no treatment or treat all)
Purpose of the approach:
To identify individuals for treatment of STIs
Linked treatments:
Treatments for infections caused by genital
herpes simplex virus, Treponema pallidum
(syphilis), lymphogranuloma venereum and
Hemophilus ducreyi (chancroid)
Anticipated outcomes:
Number of people identified correctly as
having or not having STI; number of people
identified incorrectly as having or not
having STI; consequences of appropriate
or inappropriate treatment; patient and
provider acceptability; and feasibility, equity
and resource use
Setting:
Outpatient
Perspective:
Population level
Subgroups:
High- or low-prevalence settings; settings
with limited versus established laboratory
capacity
Background:
Syndromic management refers to a
strategy for identifying and treating
STIs based on specific syndromes
(symptoms identified by a patient)
and signs (clinically observed signs of
infection) associated with clearly defined
causes. Although etiological diagnosis is
preferred, it is not always accessible or
affordable.
Fig. A6.1 provides clinical guidelines for
the syndromic management of genital
ulcer syndrome in the 2003 guidelines for
the management of sexually transmitted
infections (1).
The Guideline Development Group agreed
to update this approach for anogenital
ulcers; ulcers are a break in the skin or
mucosa and may present as ulcers, sores,
or vesicles. Genital ulcers refer to those
located on the genital or anorectal areas
and may be painful or painless.
162
Guidelines for the management of symptomatic sexually transmitted infections
Assessment
Judgement
Research evidence
Additional
considerations
Problem
Is the problem a
priority?
No
Probably no
Probably yes
Yes
Varies
Don’t know
STIs are important because of their magnitude, potential
complications and increased risk of HIV. STIs have health, social
and economic consequences. The consequences of STIs (such as
HSV and syphilis) disproportionately affect women and newborn
children. For example, women acquiring primary HSV in the third
trimester of pregnancy may result in congenital herpes, leading
to neurocognitive problems, developmental delays or death of
infants. Congenital syphilis can also cause serious morbidity or
death among infants.
Presentation of genital ulcer disease is a major challenge for
clinicians to distinguish STI-related versus non-STI-related causes.
Many individuals keep having sex even in the presence of a genital
ulcer. It has been proposed that timely diagnosis of STIs could
reduce HIV incidence.
High cost of molecular STI testing
Molecular based tests enable etiological diagnosis to guide
appropriate treatment (such as multiplex PCR test for HSV and
syphilis) but are expensive and not available in many settings.
Test accuracy
How accurate is
the test?
Very inaccurate
Inaccurate
Accurate
Very accurate
Varies
Don’t know
We conducted a systematic review (2–4), searching up to
September 2019, of the sensitivity and specificity of a syndromic
management approach to identify multiple STIs related to
anogenital ulcers. In summary, we identified four articles that
assessed the diagnostic accuracy of the clinical diagnosis of a
pathogen causing genital ulcer disease to detect any STI (Table
A6.1), 15 studies for herpes (Table A6.2), 15 studies for syphilis
(Table A6.3) and 13 studies for chancroid (Table A6.4). We found
no studies on detecting lymphogranuloma venereum.
For detecting herpes from a clinical diagnosis of herpes, 15
studies provided 20 estimates for pooling. The pooled sensitivity
for detecting herpes using a syndromic management approach
is 40.4% (95% CI: 23.0–60.6%), and pooled specificity is 88.0%
(95% CI: 75.3–94.6%).
For detection of syphilis using clinical diagnosis of syphilis
among individuals with genital ulcer disease, 15 studies provided
22 estimates for pooling. The pooled sensitivity for detecting
syphilis is 64.4% (95% CI: 44.8–80.2%) and pooled specificity
83.7% (95% CI: 67.0–92.9%).
The global distribution, incidence and prevalence of causal agents
of genital ulcer disease varies widely by geographical region and
population subgroup. This is important, since the positive and
negative predictive values depend on the prevalence of pathogens.
Other considerations related to the accuracy of tests
We found that the accuracy of the syndromic approach depends
on clinician skill and experience, clinical setting (STI centre
versus primary care) and patient characteristics (membership of
subpopulation(s)).
The positive and negative predictive values may be worse among
non-STI clinic attendees (because of lower prevalence of STIs
among “general populations”) (24).
No difference in causal agents for genital ulcer disease between
people living with HIV and those without HIV (12).
163
Annex 6. Evidence-to-decision table: genital ulcer disease
Judgement
Research evidence
Additional
considerations
Desirable effects
How substantial
are the desirable
anticipated
effects of
syndromic
approach?
Trivial
Small
Moderate
Large
Varies
Don’t know
Desirable effects and undesirable effects
The potential consequences of true positive could include appropriate
treatment, cure, side-effects, partner notification, reduced transmission
of STIs and HIV, resistance, couple difficulties and costs.
The potential consequences of true negative could include alternative
diagnoses possible and psychological benefit.
The potential consequences of false negative could include cure
still possible, persistent symptoms, complications, STI and/or HIV
transmission, no counselling and no partner notification.
The potential consequences of false positive could include
inappropriate treatment, side-effects, antimicrobial resistance, couple
difficulties and costs.
GRADE summary of findings table for clinical diagnosis and HSV
Based on the sensitivity and specificity of clinical diagnosis of STIs, we
calculated the number of people appropriately treated (true positive),
the number of missed cases (false negative) and the number of people
treated unnecessarily or overtreated (false positive).
The Guideline
Development
Group agreed
that the
desirable effects
of syndromic
management
(few
unnecessarily
treated) were
small compared
with treating all.
The Guideline
Development
Group also
agreed that the
undesirable
effects (number
of missed cases)
were moderate
compared with
treating all in
particular for
syphilis (due to
the consequences
of transmission).
Overtreatment
may be
acceptable if
high morbidity
and mortality
from undetected
cases requires
controlling
the STI in the
population (such
as syphilis).
However, there
is still a risk of
unnecessary
treatment and
potential for
STI-related
stigma due to
low specificity
of syndromic
management.
Underdiagnosis
of herpes may
not be a problem
(except for
pregnant women)
since adequate
treatment with
antiviral agents
may not be easily
accessible or
too expensive in
resource-limited
settings.
Treatment of people with HSV based on a clinical diagnosis
Pooled sensitivity: 0.40 (95% CI: 0.23 to 0.61)
Pooled specificity: 0.88 (95% CI: 0.75 to 0.95)
Test result
Number of results per 100
patients tested (95% CI)
Number of
participants
(studies)
Certainty of
the Evidence
(GRADE)
Prevalence 30%
Typically seen in
Prevalence 70%
Typically seen in
True positives
12 (7 to 18)
28 (16 to 42)
2667
(15)
Higha
False negatives
18 (12 to 23)
42 (28 to 54)
True negatives
62 (53 to 66)
26 (23 to 28)
2667
(15)
Higha
False positives
8 (4 to 17)
4 (2 to 7)
CI: Confidence interval
Explanations
a Some heterogeneity but confidence intervals not wide.
GRADE summary of findings table for clinical diagnosis and syphilis
Treatment of people with syphilis based on a clinical diagnosis
Pooled sensitivity: 0.64 (95% CI: 0.45 to 0.80)
Pooled specificity: 0.84 (95% CI: 0.67 to 0.93)
Test result
Number of results per 100
patients tested (95% CI)
Number of
participants
(studies)
Certainty of
the Evidence
(GRADE)
Prevalence 5%
Typically seen in
Prevalence 10%
Typically seen in
True positives
3 (2 to 4)
6 (4 to 8)
2667
(15)
Moderatea
False negatives
2 (1 to 3)
4 (2 to 6)
True negatives
80 (64 to 88)
75 (60 to 84)
2667
(15)
Moderatea
False positives
15 (7 to 31)
15 (6 to 30)
CI: Confidence interval
Explanations
a Estimates from studies varied widely, meaning wide confidence intervals and then absolute effects.
164
Guidelines for the management of symptomatic sexually transmitted infections
Judgement
Research evidence
Additional
considerations
Desirable effects
Prevalence of chancroid
Percantage
Year
Chancroid
A: Master
1980
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
1975
1985199019952000200520102015
1980
1975
1985199019952000200520102015
1975 1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2005 2010
Percantage
Year
B: Low income
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
Percantage
Year
C: Middle income
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
Year
1993
1992
1994
1995
1996
Percantage
Year
D: High income
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
120%
140%
Same-day treatment
Prompt treatment (within 72 hours after genital lesions appear) of
HSV with antiviral agents can reduce genital viral shedding and the
duration of ulcers by 1–4 days (25–27).
Considerations for the certainty of the evidence of accuracy
Reference laboratory tests are not always equivalent in studies
included in the meta-analysis.
Clinical diagnosis can be highly variable between and within
countries and settings since it depends on the skill of the clinician:
previous experience, knowledge of risk factors and the prevalence of
the pathogen (13).
Global distribution and the incidence and prevalence of causal
agents of genital ulcer disease vary widely by geographical
region and population subgroup. This is important as the positive
and negative predictive values depend on the prevalence of the
pathogens.
Studies relying on HSV and syphilis serology as the reference may
overestimate positivity since they may not distinguish current infection
(as the cause of the genital ulcer disease) or past treated infection.
Untested pathogens could be a cause of anogenital ulceration, although
they are less common, such as C. trachomatis lymphogranuloma
venereum, Haemophilus ducreyi and Candida glabrata.
All studies were convenience samples, and none had a truly random
sample, so generalizing the results is difficult. Most were recruited
from sexual health clinics, biasing the sample. Similarly, since the
studies were cross-sectional, we were unable to assess temporal
association between symptoms and STIs.
There is a
potential for the
loss of confidence
in the health
system if genital
ulcer disease is
inappropriately
managed.
There is a lower
likelihood of
antimicrobial
resistance with
syphilis and HSV.
Undesirable effects
How substantial
are the
undesirable
anticipated
effects?
Large
Moderate
Small
Trivial
Varies
Don’t know
Certainty of the evidence
of test accuracy
What is the
overall certainty
of the evidence of
test accuracy?
Very low
Low
Moderate
High
No included
studies
Certainty of the evidence of
the effects of management
What is the
overall certainty
of the evidence
of effects of the
management
that is guided by
the test results?
Very low
Low
Moderate
High
No included
studies
The evidence for management was based on current WHO
recommendations for treating women with pelvic inflammatory
disease.
165
Annex 6. Evidence-to-decision table: genital ulcer disease
Judgement
Research evidence
Additional
considerations
Certainty of effects
What is the
overall certainty
of the evidence
of effects of the
test?
Very low
Low
Moderate
High
No included
studies
Values
Is there
important
uncertainty about
or variability in
how much people
value the main
outcomes?
Important
uncertainty or
variability
Possibly
important
uncertainty or
variability
Probably no
important
uncertainty or
variability
No important
uncertainty or
variability
The Guideline Development Group placed greater value on not
missing cases than on unnecessary treatment.
Balance of effects
Does the
balance between
desirable and
undesirable
effects favour the
intervention or
the comparison?
Favours the
comparison
Probably favours
the comparison
Does not favour
either the
intervention or
the comparison
Probably favours
the intervention
Favours the
intervention
Varies
Don’t know
Treating all was favoured since there were no missed cases in
people presenting with ulcers, and there was little value placed on
unnecessarily treating people.
166
Guidelines for the management of symptomatic sexually transmitted infections
Judgement
Research evidence
Additional
considerations
Resources required
How large are
the resource
requirements
(costs)?
Large costs
Moderate costs
Negligible costs
and savings
Moderate
savings
Large savings
Varies
Don’t know
Need for better training for nurses working in primary health care
settings in Botswana (28).
Etiological diagnosis requires training, infrastructure, time and
money.
Certainty of evidence of required resources
What is the
certainty of
the evidence
of resource
requirements
(costs)?
Very low
Low
Moderate
High
No included
studies
Korenromp (29) reported the unit cost of treatment.
STI or
syndrome
Treatment dose
per day
Drugs,
per
dose
Treatment
duration
(days)
Drugs per
treatment
Drugs +
service
delivery
Herpes
Acyclovir 400 mg
3
7
US$ 0.04
US$ 11.05
Syphilis
Benzathine PCN
2.4 M
1
1
US$ 0.44
US$ 11.65
Chancroid
Azithromycin
500 mg
2
1
US$ 0.38
US$ 10.95
STI
Test
Cost
Service
delivery
Total
Syphilis, herpes, chancroid
mPCR
??
??
Syphilis
Rapid test
US$ 0.50
US$ 3.00
US$ 3.50
Cost–effectiveness
Does the cost–
effectiveness of
the intervention
favour the
intervention or
the comparison?
Favours the
comparison
Probably favours
the comparison
Does not favour
either the
intervention or
the comparison
Probably favours
the intervention
Favours the
intervention
Varies
No included
studies
Overall, the Guideline Development Group agreed that, although there
are few differences between the costs of treating all, not treating
and syndromic management, the costs of more cases missed with
syndromic management made treating all the more cost-effective.
Adams et al. (30) examined the cost–effectiveness of syndromic
management (including genital ulcer disease) in pharmacies in Lima,
Peru. They reported an overall cost saving of US$ 1.51 per adequately
managed case, from a societal perspective.
The mean cost per syphilis treated for syndromic management of
genital ulcer disease cases in China was US$ 13.54 in 2003 (6).
Cost–effectiveness analysis in Cambodia: cost per genital ulcer disease
case = US$ 43.21 (USD, 2002) for men from the general population,
US$ 43.56 for women from the general population and US$ 44.05 for
female sex workers.
US$ 10.15 per syndrome treated in the United Republic of Tanzania (in
1993) – no disaggregated data for genital ulcer disease (31).
The average cost per STI treated in a primary care setting in the
Central African Republic (including 7% with genital ulcer disease) was
US$ 3.90 (in 1993) (32).
China, Taiwan: US$ 14.30 (in 2005) for the cost of correctly treating
syphilis using a syndromic approach versus US$ 21.58 for an
etiological approach (33). The authors conclude that, in Taiwan, China,
syndromic management was more cost-effective than etiological
diagnosis in terms of cost per person with STI treated (health-care
provider perspective).
167
Annex 6. Evidence-to-decision table: genital ulcer disease
Judgement
Research evidence
Additional
considerations
Cost–effectiveness
A modelling study to evaluate the incremental cost–effectiveness
ratio of the WHO 2003 genital ulcer disease algorithm versus the
1994 genital ulcer disease algorithm reports that the incremental
cost–effectiveness ratio for treating HSV-2 ranged from US$ 0.50 to
US$ 8.50 depending on the prevalence of genital ulcer disease causes
(Haemophilus ducreyi, true positive, HSV-2) (34).
Syndromic management is likely to be cost-saving in rural South
Africa, considering its potential impact on reducing HIV incidence (35).
In Côte d’Ivoire, the mean drug cost per cure = US$ 4.50 (in 1994) and
mean direct cost per cure = US$ 4.90 (36).
Equity
What would be
the impact on
health equity?
Reduced
Probably reduced
Probably no
impact
Probably
increased
Increased
Varies
Don’t know
The cost of antiviral agents might be prohibitive for some people
or in some settings. The cost of STI management – including
consultation, drugs and tests – might also be prohibitively high for
some subpopulations.
Partner notification processes in resource-limited settings are poorly
described and largely non-existent.
Diagnostic test
for ulcers (such
as M-PCR) are
costly, technically
sophisticated,
time-consuming
and thus rarely
affordable,
available or
accessible in
resource-limited
settings.
If a diagnostic is
used, the patient
might need to
return to discuss
the results.
Acceptability
Is the
intervention
acceptable to key
stakeholders?
No
Probably no
Probably yes
Yes
Varies
Don’t know
Clinicians
Pharmacy and clinicians offered syndromic management in Peru –
community randomized controlled trial (37).
More than 90% of 100 clinicians from Pakistan were willing to
attend educational sessions and follow the national STI treatment
protocols (38).
Concerns about how general practitioners treat people with genital
ulcer disease in Namibia (39).
Difficulties in providing syndromic STI management noted among
health-care providers (doctors and midwives) in Karachi (40).
Patients
83% of patients in the United Republic of Tanzania reported
satisfaction with STI services using syndromic management (41).
For algorithms that required follow-up (such as that in Rwanda) (42),
50% failed to return for follow-up.
May be
difficulties from
health-care
providers in
communicating
or discussing
sensitive issues
related to sex.
Symptomatic
patients may not
disclose their
symptoms for a
variety of reasons
(fear of stigma,
lack of access,
etc…)
Immediate relief
of symptoms
may be preferred
rather than
waiting for test
results
168
Guidelines for the management of symptomatic sexually transmitted infections
Judgement
Research evidence
Additional
considerations
Feasibility
Is the
intervention
feasible to
implement?
No
Probably no
Probably yes
Yes
Varies
Don’t know
Etiological diagnosis requires skilled personnel and sophisticated
equipment and is expensive and time-consuming.
Successful use of syndromic management
Syndromic management for genital ulcer disease has been
implemented in many resource-limited settings with variable
success: Ethiopia (43,44), Kenya (24,45), Malawi (46,47), Peru (23),
United Republic of Tanzania (48), Peru (49), India (50–53), United
Republic of Tanzania (41), Zambia (22), Namibia (39), China (6),
Malawi (54), Zimbabwe (55), Karachi (40), South Africa (25,56–59),
Bangladesh (53), Burkina Faso (54), Brazil (60), Central African
Republic (32), Rwanda (42), Côte d’Ivoire (36), Swaziland (61),
Gambia (62) and Mozambique (63).
Standardized simulated patients visited pharmacies in the United
Republic of Tanzania but found challenges for pharmacies to
adequately manage genital ulcer disease syndromes (48). Pharmacy
staff in Gambia were willing to offer syndromic management, but
none of the simulated patients with genital ulcer disease would be
treated appropriately (64).
Rural clinics in South Africa – only 9% were correctly managed using
a syndromic management approach (no disaggregated data for
genital ulcer disease) (65).
A survey of 43 doctors working in South Africa found that 23% had
correct knowledge about managing genital ulcer disease (66).
Only 9% of patients in South Africa received comprehensive
syndromic management (67).
None of the 50 general practitioners interviewed in Namibia could
manage genital ulcer disease properly according to the syndromic
management guidelines (39).
Interviews with health-care workers from 240 health-care facilities
in six countries in western Africa found suboptimal STI management,
with effective treatment given to only 14% of the patients (68).
Community pharmacies see many potential STIs, but none of the
85 head pharmacists from South Africa correctly identified the
treatment for genital ulcers (69).
Nurses in Rwanda could deliver STI syndromic management in
country towns (42).
Syndromic management protocol followed for 70% of genital ulcer
disease cases presenting to Male Health Clinic in India (52).
Interviews with 120 GPs and 244 occupational health nurses
working in the private sector in South Africa in 1997 (59): 14% of
GPs reported effective treatment for genital ulcer disease.
Training
A mixed-methods study of 250 clinicians in Ethiopia, including
the use of mystery patients, found that only 13% were trained in
the syndromic management of STIs (70), highlighting the need for
training and supervision.
Sixteen nurses from primary health centres in Nigeria were trained
to manage STIs using a syndromic approach, demonstrating its
acceptability and feasibility (62).
Doctors and paramedics in India were successfully trained for
syndromic case management (71).
Surveillance of STIs
Change in the causes of genital ulcer disease over time in Malawi
(1992–1999) (52).
Syndromic
management
often provided
at primary care
level (including
pharmacies) in
low- and middle-
income countries
without clinical
examination.
A syndromic
algorithm may
be preferable to
nothing, enabling
health-care
providers to
make a diagnosis
rapidly without
special skills or
sophisticated
laboratory
investigations.
If syndromic
management is
to be scaled up, it
is essential that
adequate training
and supervision is
provided.
Ongoing need for
regular updating
of syndromic
management
protocols in
accordance with
changing trends
of STIs.
Need ongoing
evaluation of the
quality of the
services offering
syndromic
management,
such as
adherence to the
algorithms.
Intermittent
etiological
diagnosis to
track changes in
the underlying
epidemiology of
STIs causing the
syndromes and
thus whether
the antibiotics
prescribed need
to be changed.
169
Annex 6. Evidence-to-decision table: genital ulcer disease
Summary of judgements
Judgement
Problem
No
Probably no
Probably
yes
Yes
Varies
Don’t know
Test accuracy
Very
inaccurate
Inaccurate
Accurate
Very
accurate
Varies
Don’t know
Desirable
effects
Trivial
Small
Moderate
Large
Varies
Don’t know
Undesirable
effects
Large
Moderate
Small
Trivial
Varies
Don’t know
Certainty of
the evidence of
test accuracy
Very low
Low
Moderate
High
No included
studies
Certainty of
the evidence of
the effects of
management
Very low
Low
Moderate
High
No included
studies
Certainty of
effects
Very low
Low
Moderate
High
No included
studies
Values
Important
uncertainty
or
variability
Possibly
important
uncertainty
or
variability
Probably no
important
uncertainty
or
variability
No
important
uncertainty
or
variability
Balance of
effects
Favours the
comparison
Probably
favours the
comparison
Does not
favour
either the
intervention
or the
comparison
Probably
favours the
intervention
Favours the
intervention
Varies
Don’t know
Resources
required
Large costs
Moderate
costs
Negligible
costs and
savings
Moderate
savings
Large
savings
Varies
Don’t know
Certainty
of evidence
of required
resources
Very low
Low
Moderate
High
No included
studies
Cost–
effectiveness
Favours the
comparison
Probably
favours the
comparison
Does not
favour
either the
intervention
or the
comparison
Probably
favours the
intervention
Favours the
intervention
Varies
No included
studies
Equity
Reduced
Probably
reduced
Probably no
impact
Probably
increased
Increased
Varies
Don’t know
Acceptability
No
Probably no
Probably
yes
Yes
Varies
Don’t know
Feasibility
No
Probably no
Probably
yes
Yes
Varies
Don’t know
170
Guidelines for the management of symptomatic sexually transmitted infections
Conclusions
Should current WHO syndromic management be recommended versus laboratory
diagnosis, no treatment or treat all to identify sexually transmitted infections
among people with anogenital ulcers?
Type of
recommendation
Strong
recommendation
against the
intervention
Conditional
recommendation
against the
intervention
Conditional
recommendation for
either the intervention
or the comparison
Conditional
recommendation
for the
intervention
Strong
recommendation
for the intervention
Draft
recommendation
Recommendations for management of genital ulcer disease, including anorectal ulcers
For people who present with genital ulcers (including anorectal ulcers), we recommend treatment
based on quality-assured molecular assays of the ulcer. However, in settings with limited or no
molecular tests or laboratory capacity, we recommend syndromic treatment to ensure treatment
on the same day of the visit.
Good practice includes:
•	 taking a medical and sexual history and assessing the risk of STIs;
•	 performing a physical examination of the genital and anal areas;
•	 offering HIV and syphilis testing and other preventive services as recommended in other
guidelines; and
•	 providing analgesics for pain.
Settings with quality-assured molecular testing in a laboratory with a fully operational quality
management system and results available on the same day of the visit
For people with confirmed anogenital ulcers, we recommend to:
1.	Perform molecular assays (NAAT) from anogenital lesions to confirm or exclude herpes simplex
virus and Treponema pallidum (syphilis).
2.	Perform molecular assays from anogenital lesions to confirm lymphogranuloma venereum in
geographical settings and/or populations where cases are reported or emerging.
3.	Perform serological tests for syphilis, with appropriate interpretation for management
depending on the test or tests used.
4.	Treat for syphilis and/or herpes simplex virus according to the results available on the same
day of the visit or treat syndromically and revise management according to the results when
available.
5.	Treat for lymphogranuloma venereum when the results are positive.
6.	Treat for chancroid only in geographical settings where cases are reported or emerging.
171
Annex 6. Evidence-to-decision table: genital ulcer disease
Draft
recommendation
Settings in which same-day treatment is not feasible with molecular testing or with limited or no
molecular testing
For people with confirmed anogenital ulcers, WHO suggests the following.
1.	Treat syndromically for syphilis and herpes simplex virus on the same day.
2.	Treat for herpes simplex virus if the ulcer is recurrent or vesicular, and treat for syphilis if the
person has no history of recent treatment for syphilis (in the past three months).
3.	Treat for chancroid only in geographical settings where cases are reported or emerging.
Good practice includes.
•	 Performing serological tests for syphilis, including an RPR-equivalent test, if available, to
attempt to identify active syphilis and for monitoring the response to treatment.
Referring men with persistent anogenital ulcers to a centre with laboratory capacity and expertise
to diagnose herpes or less common pathogens (lymphogranuloma venereum, donovanosis and
chancroid) and other genital or gastrointestinal conditions.
Remarks
Genital ulcer disease refers to breaks in the skin or mucosa and may present as ulcers, sores or
vesicles. Anogenital ulcers refer to those located on the genital or anal areas and may be painful
or painless.
A negative serological test for syphilis when anogenital ulcers have been present for less than
three weeks does not definitively exclude syphilis, since antibodies may not yet be present to be
detected by a serological test for syphilis. See WHO guidance on interpreting syphilis tests (see
subsection 10.2).
Justification
Managing people presenting with anogenital ulcers based on a syndromic approach results in
small benefits and moderate harms compared to molecular testing or treating all. Molecular
testing may not be feasible in all settings and alternatively treating all would be feasible and the
costs would be negligible. Treating all or conducting molecular testing would be acceptable to all
and would not have a negative impact on equity (in some settings it may increase equity).
172
Guidelines for the management of symptomatic sexually transmitted infections
Fig. A6.1. Current WHO syndromic approach to management of genital ulcers
Take history and examine
Person with symptom of genital sore or ulcer
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Treat for HSV-2
Treat for syphilis if indicated
• Educate and council on
risk reduction
• Promote condom use and
provide condoms
• Manage and treat partner
• Offer HIV counselling and
testing if both facilities are
available
Treat for syphilis
and chancroid
Treat for HSV2
Continue treatment
for a further 7 days
• Educate and council
• Promote condom use and provide condoms
• Offer HIV counselling and testing if both facilities are available
• Ask patient to return in 7 days
• Educate and council
• Promote condom use
and provide condoms
• Offer HIV counselling
and testing if both
facilities are available
Refer
No
No
No
No
Only vesicles present?
Ulcer(s) healed?
Sore or ulcer present?
Ulcer(s) improving?
173
Annex 6. Evidence-to-decision table: genital ulcer disease
References
1.	 Guidelines for the management of sexually transmitted infections. Geneva: World Health
Organization; 2003 (https://www.who.int/hiv/pub/sti/pub6/en, accessed 31 March 2021).
2.	 Higgins JPT, Thomas J, Chandler J, Cumpston M, Li T, Page MJ, editors. Cochrane
handbook for systematic reviews of interventions version 5.1. Cochrane; 2021
(https://training.cochrane.org/handbook, accessed 31 March 2021).
3.	 Appendix 9.1. Critical appraisal checklist. In: Aromataris E, Munn Z, editors. JBI manual for
evidence synthesis. Adelaide: JBI; 2020.
4.	 Rutter CM, Gatsonis CA. A hierarchical regression approach to meta-analysis of diagnostic
test accuracy evaluations. Stat Med. 2001;20:2865–84.
5.	 Das A, Ghosh P, Ghosh I, Bhattacharya R, Azad Sardar AK, Goswami S et al. Usefulness
and utility of NACO regime in the management of sexually transmitted infections: a pilot
study. Indian J Dermatol. 2017;62:630–4.
6.	 Liu H, Jamison D, Li X, Ma E, Yin Y, Detels R. Is syndromic management better than the
current approach for treatment of STDs in China? Evaluation of the cost–effectiveness of
syndromic management for male STD patients. Sex Transm Dis. 2003;30:327–30.
7.	 Sanchez J, Volquez C, Totten PA, Campos PE, Ryan C, Catlin M et al. The etiology and
management of genital ulcers in the Dominican Republic and Peru. Sex Transm Dis.
2002;29:559–67.
8.	 Behets FM, Andriamiadana J, Randrianasolo D, Randriamanga R, Rasamilalao D, Chen
CY et al. Chancroid, primary syphilis, genital herpes, and lymphogranuloma venereum in
Antananarivo, Madagascar. J Infect Dis. 1999;180:1382–5.
9.	 Behets FM, Brathwaite AR, Hylton-Kong T, Chen CY, Hoffman I, Weiss JB et al. Genital
ulcers: etiology, clinical diagnosis, and associated human immunodeficiency virus infection
in Kingston, Jamaica. Clin Infect Dis. 1999;28:1086–90.
10.	 Beyrer C, Jitwatcharanan K, Natpratan C, Kaewvichit R, Nelson KE, Chen CY et al.
Molecular methods for the diagnosis of genital ulcer disease in a sexually transmitted
disease clinic population in northern Thailand: predominance of herpes simplex virus
infection. J Infect Dis. 1998;178:243–6.
11.	 Bhavsar C, Patel RM, Marfatia Y. A study of 113 cases of genital ulcerative disease and
urethral discharge syndrome with validation of syndromic management of sexually
transmitted diseases. Indian J Sex Transm Dis AIDS. 2014;35:35–9.
12.	 Bogaerts J, Vuylsteke B, Martinez Tello W, Mukantabana V, Akingeneye J, Laga M et al.
Simple algorithms for the management of genital ulcers: evaluation in a primary health
care centre in Kigali, Rwanda. Bull World Health Organ. 1995;73:761–7.
13.	 DiCarlo RP, Martin DH. The clinical diagnosis of genital ulcer disease in men. Clin Infect
Dis. 1997;25:292–8.
14.	 Hina R, Tankhiwale SS, Surpam RB. Study of seroprevalence and syndromic validation
of HSV2 among genito-ulcerative disease patients attending STI clinic in a tertiary care
hospital. J Evol Med Dent Sci. 2017;6:2984–6.
15.	 Htun Y, Morse SA, Dangor Y, Fehler G, Radebe F, Trees DL et al. Comparison of clinically
directed, disease specific, and syndromic protocols for the management of genital ulcer
disease in Lesotho. Sex Transm Infect. 1998;74(Suppl. 1):S23–8.
174
Guidelines for the management of symptomatic sexually transmitted infections
16.	 Prabhakar P, Narayanan P, Deshpande GR, Das A, Neilsen G, Mehendale S et al. Genital
ulcer disease in India: etiologies and performance of current syndrome guidelines. Sex
Transm Dis. 2012;39:906–10.
17.	 Risbud A, Chan-Tack K, Gadkari D, Gangakhedkar RR, Shepherd ME, Bollinger R et al. The
etiology of genital ulcer disease by multiplex polymerase chain reaction and relationship to
HIV infection among patients attending sexually transmitted disease clinics in Pune, India.
Sex Transm Dis. 1999;26:55–62.
18.	 Wang Q, Yang P, Zhong M, Wang G. Validation of diagnostic algorithms for syndromic
management of sexually transmitted diseases. Chin Med J. 2003;116:181–6.
19.	 Wang QQ, Mabey D, Peeling RW, Tan ML, Jian DM, Yang P et al. Validation of syndromic
algorithm for the management of genital ulcer diseases in China. Int J STD AIDS.
2002;13:469–74.
20.	 Fast MV, D’Costa LJ, Nsanze H, Piot P, Curran J, Karasira P et al. The clinical diagnosis of
genital ulcer disease in men in the tropics. Sex Transm Dis. 1984;11:72–6.
21.	 Dangor Y, Ballard RC, da LEF, Fehler G, Miller SD, Koornhof HJ. Accuracy of clinical
diagnosis of genital ulcer disease. Sex Transm Dis. 1990;17:184–9.
22.	 Hanson S, Sunkutu RM, Kamanga J, Hojer B, Sandstrom E. STD care in Zambia: an
evaluation of the guidelines for case management through a syndromic approach. Int J STD
AIDS. 1996;7:324–32.
23.	 Ndinya-Achola JO, Kihara AN, Fisher LD, Krone MR, Plummer FA, Ronald A et al.
Presumptive specific clinical diagnosis of genital ulcer disease in a primary health care
setting in Nairobi. Int J STD AIDS. 1996;7:201–5.
24.	 Otieno FO, Ndivo R, Oswago S, Ondiek J, Pals S, McLellan-Lemal E et al. Evaluation of
syndromic management of sexually transmitted infections within the Kisumu Incidence
Cohort Study. Int J STD AIDS. 2014;25:851–9.
25.	 Nilsen AE, Aasen T, Halsos AM, Kinge BR, Tjotta EA, Wikstrom K et al. Efficacy of oral
acyclovir in the treatment of initial and recurrent genital herpes. Lancet. 1982;2:571–3.
26.	 Bryson YJ, Dillon M, Lovett M, Acuna G, Taylor S, Cherry JD et al. Treatment of first
episodes of genital herpes simplex virus infection with oral acyclovir. A randomized
double-blind controlled trial in normal subjects. N Engl J Med. 1983;308:916–21.
27.	 Reichman RC, Badger GJ, Mertz GJ, Corey L, Richman DD, Connor JD et al. Treatment of
recurrent genital herpes simplex infections with oral acyclovir. A controlled trial. JAMA.
1984;251:2103–7.
28.	 Boonstra E, Lindbaek M, Klouman E, Ngome E, Romoren M, Sundby J. Syndromic
management of sexually transmitted diseases in Botswana’s primary health care: quality of
care aspects. Trop Med Int Health. 2003;8:604–14.
29.	 Korenromp EL, Wi T, Resch S, Stover J, Broutet N. Costing of national STI program
implementation for the global STI control strategy for the health sector, 2016–2021. PLoS
One. 2017;12:e0170773.
30.	 Adams EJ, Garcia PJ, Garnett GP, Edmunds WJ, Holmes KK. The cost–effectiveness of
syndromic management in pharmacies in Lima, Peru. Sex Transm Dis. 2003;30:379–87.
31.	 Gilson L, Mkanje R, Grosskurth H, Mosha F, Picard J, Gavyole A et al. Cost–effectiveness of
improved treatment services for sexually transmitted diseases in preventing HIV-1 infection
in Mwanza Region, Tanzania. Lancet. 1997;350:1805–9.
175
Annex 6. Evidence-to-decision table: genital ulcer disease
32.	 Parker KA, Koumans EH, Hawkins RV, Massanga M, Somse P, Barker K et al. Providing
low-cost sexually transmitted diseases services in two semi-urban health centers in Central
African Republic (CAR): characteristics of patients and patterns of health care-seeking
behavior. Sex Transm Dis. 1999;26:508–16.
33.	 Tsai CH, Lee TC, Chang HL, Tang LH, Chiang CC, Chen KT. The cost–effectiveness of
syndromic management for male sexually transmitted disease patients with urethral
discharge symptoms and genital ulcer disease in Taiwan. Sex Transm Infect. 2008;84:400–
4.
34.	 Vickerman P, Ndowa F, Mayaud P. Modelling the cost per ulcer treated of incorporating
episodic treatment for HSV-2 into the syndromic algorithm for genital ulcer disease. Sex
Transm Infect. 2008;84:243–8.
35.	 White RG, Moodley P, McGrath N, Hosegood V, Zaba B, Herbst K et al. Low effectiveness
of syndromic treatment services for curable sexually transmitted infections in rural South
Africa. Sex Transm Infect. 2008;84:528–34.
36.	 La Ruche G, Lorougnon F, Digbeu N. Therapeutic algorithms for the management of
sexually transmitted diseases at the peripheral level in Côte d’Ivoire: assessment of
efficacy and cost. Bull World Health Organ. 1995;73:305–13.
38.	 Khandwalla HE, Luby S, Rahman S. Knowledge, attitudes, and practices regarding sexually
transmitted infections among general practitioners and medical specialists in Karachi,
Pakistan. Sex Transm Infect. 2000;76:383–5.
39.	 Iipinge SN, Pretorius L. The delivery and quality of sexually transmitted infections
treatment by private general practitioners in Windhoek Namibia. Glob J Health Sci.
2012;4:156–71.
40.	 Mahmood MA, Saniotis A. Use of syndromic management algorithm for sexually
transmitted infections and reproductive tract infections management in community
settings in Karachi. J Pakistan Med Assoc. 2011;61:453–7.
41.	 Grosskurth H, Mwijarubi E, Todd J, Rwakatare M, Orroth K, Mayaud P et al. Operational
performance of an STD control programme in Mwanza Region, Tanzania. Sex Transm
Infect. 2000;76:426–36.
42.	 Steen R, Soliman C, Mujyambwani A, Twagirakristu JB, Bucyana S, Grundmann C et al.
Notes from the field: practical issues in upgrading STD services based on experience from
primary healthcare facilities in two Rwandan towns. Sex Transm Infect. 1998;74(Suppl.
1):S159–65.
43.	 Beyene M, Gizachew Y, Afework K, Berihun M, Shitaye A, Bemnet A et al. Sexually
transmitted infections based on the syndromic approach in Gondar town, northwest
Ethiopia: a retrospective cross-sectional study. BMC Public Health. 2013;13(143).
44.	 Wolday D, Z GM, Mohammed Z, Meles H, Messele T, Seme W et al. Risk factors associated
with failure of syndromic treatment of sexually transmitted diseases among women
seeking primary care in Addis Ababa. Sex Transm Infect. 2004;80:392–4.
45.	 Cheluget B, Joesoef MR, Marum LH, Wandera C, Ryan CA, Decock KM et al. Changing
patterns in sexually transmitted disease syndromes in Kenya after the introduction of a
syndromic management program. Sex Transm Dis. 2004;31:522–5.
46.	 Chilongozi DA, Daly CC, Franco L, Liomba NG, Dallabetta G. Sexually transmitted diseases:
a survey of case management in Malawi. Int J STD AIDS. 1996;7:269–75.
176
Guidelines for the management of symptomatic sexually transmitted infections
47.	 Behets FM, Liomba G, Lule G, Dallabetta G, Hoffman IF, Hamilton HA et al. Sexually
transmitted diseases and human immunodeficiency virus control in Malawi: a field study of
genital ulcer disease. J Infect Dis. 1995;171:451–5.
48.	 Garcia PJ, Gotuzzo E, Hughes JP, Holmes KK. Syndromic management of STDs
in pharmacies: evaluation and randomised intervention trial. Sex Transm Infect.
1998;74(Suppl. 1):S153–8.
49.	 Garcia PJ, Holmes KK, Carcamo CP, Garnett GP, Hughes JP, Campos PE et al. Prevention of
sexually transmitted infections in urban communities (Peru PREVEN): a multicomponent
community-randomised controlled trial. Lancet. 2012;379:1120–8.
50.	 Goel SS. Study of syndromic management approach in the management of sexually
transmitted diseases in rural population. Indian J Sex Transm Dis. 2012;33:146–7.
51.	 Mertens TE, Smith GD, Kantharaj K, Mugrditchian D, Radhakrishnan KM. Observations of
sexually transmitted disease consultations in India. Public Health. 1998;112:123–8.
52.	 Sharma K, Chavan Y, Aras R, Khismatrao D. Syndromic management of STDs in a male
health clinic in a primary health care setting. Indian J Sex Transm Dis. 2011;32:136–7.
53.	 Tankhiwale SS, Chavan SP. Comparative study of syndromic and etiological diagnosis
of sexually transmitted infection except human immunodeficiency virus in sexually
transmitted infection and reproductive tract infection clinic attendees in central India. Int J
Med Public Health. 2013;3:347–51.
54.	 Lule G, Behets FMT, Hoffman IF, Liomba G, Dallabetta G, Hamilton HA et al. Choosing an
effective and affordable antibiotic regimen for sexually transmitted diseases (STD) patients
in Malawi. Malawi Med J. 1998;11:50–5.
55.	 Machiha A, Mugurungi O, Tshimanga M, Kilmarx P, Mungati M, Nyakura J et al. The
aetiology of genital ulcer disease and association with HIV infection in Zimbabwe. Sex
Transm Infect. 2015;91:A157.
56.	 Mark J, Hariri S, Ilunga R, Forhan S, Likibi M, M LK et al. Evaluation of sexually transmitted
infection clinical services in Gauteng Province, South Africa: knowledge, attitudes, and
beliefs among health care providers. Sex Transm Infect. 2011;87:A92–3.
57.	 Mathews C, van Rensburg A, Coetzee N. The sensitivity of a syndromic management
approach in detecting sexually transmitted diseases in patients at a public health clinic in
Cape Town. S Afr Med J. 1998;88:1337–40.
58.	 Moodley P, Sturm PD, Vanmali T, Wilkinson D, Connolly C, Sturm AW. Association
between HIV-1 infection, the etiology of genital ulcer disease, and response to syndromic
management. Sex Transm Dis. 2003;30:241–5.
59.	 Schneider H, Blaauw D, Dartnall E, Coetzee DJ, Ballard RC. STD care in the South African
private health sector. S Afr Med J. 2001;91:151–6.
60.	 Moherdaui F, Vuylsteke B, Siqueira LF, dos Santos Junior MQ, Jardim ML, de Brito AM et
al. Validation of national algorithms for the diagnosis of sexually transmitted diseases in
Brazil: results from a multicentre study. Sex Transm Infect. 1998;74(Suppl. 1):S38–43.
61.	 Meheus A, Van Dyck E, Ursi JP, Ballard RC, Piot P. Etiology of genital ulcerations in
Swaziland. Sex Transm Dis. 1983;10:33–5.
62.	 Mabey DC, Wall RA, Bello CS. Aetiology of genital ulceration in the Gambia. Genitourin
Med. 1987;63:312–5.
177
Annex 6. Evidence-to-decision table: genital ulcer disease
63.	 Mbofana FS, Brito FJ, Saifodine A, Cliff JL. Syndromic management of sexually transmitted
diseases at primary care level, Mozambique. Sex Transm Infect. 2002;78:E2.
64.	 Leiva A, Shaw M, Paine K, Manneh K, McAdam K, Mayaud P. Management of sexually
transmitted diseases in urban pharmacies in The Gambia. Int J STD AIDS. 2001;12:444–52.
65.	 Harrison A, Wilkinson D, Lurie M, Connolly AM, Karim SA. Improving quality of sexually
transmitted disease case management in rural South Africa. AIDS. 1998;12:2329–35.
66.	 Uchenna C, Govender I. Knowledge, attitudes and practices of doctors at Jubilee Hospital,
Tshwane District, regarding the syndromic management guidelines for sexually transmitted
infections. S Afr Fam Pract. 2018;60:155–61.
67.	 Wilkinson D, Karim SS, Lurie M, Harrison A. Public-private health sector partnerships
for STD control in South Africa – perspectives from the Hlabisa experience. S Afr Med J.
2001;91:517–20.
68.	 Bitera R, Alary M, Masse B, Viens P, Lowndes C, Baganizi E et al. [Quality of disease
management of sexually transmitted diseases: investigation of care in six countries in
western Africa]. Sante. 2002;12:233–9.
69.	 Ward K, Butler N, Mugabo P, Klausner J, McFarland W, Chen S et al. Provision of syndromic
treatment of sexually transmitted infections by community pharmacists: a potentially
underutilized HIV prevention strategy. Sex Transm Dis. 2003;30:609–13.
70.	 Alemayehu A, Godana W. Knowledge and practice of clinicians regarding syndromic
management of sexually transmitted infections in public health facilities of Gamo Gofa
Zone, south Ethiopia. J Sex Transm Dis. 2015;2015:310409.
71.	 Sharma R, Prajapati S, Patel B, Kumar P. Evaluation of skill-oriented training on enhanced
syndromic case management (ESCM) of reproductive tract infections / sexually transmitted
infections (RTI/STIs) of care providers from three-tier health-care system of Gujarat. Indian
J Community Med. 2016;41:183–9.
178
Guidelines for the management of symptomatic sexually transmitted infections
Table A6.1. Detection of any STI for genital ulcer syndrome (shaded rows represents studies testing presence of ulcer
to detect any STIs)
Study
Year of
study
Country
Country
income
level
Sample
size
Where recruited
Subpopulation
How a positive
case is defined
Pathogens
Diagnostics
True
positive
False
negative
False
positive
True
negative
Das et
al. (5)
2013
India
Lower
middle
297
STI and
gynaecology
outpatients
22% male
12% genital
ulcer disease
Presence of
ulcer
HSV, Candida
glabrata,
cytomegalovirus,
true positive
VDRL, TPHA,
Smear, HSV-
Ab
14
215
27
41
Liu et al.
(6)
2003
China
Upper
middle
55
Sexual health
clinic
100% male
14% genital
ulcer disease
Presence of
ulcer
HSV, true positive,
Haemophilus
ducreyi
PCR, RPR,
TPPA
13
0
40
2
Sanchez
et al. (7)
1995–
1996
Dominican
Republic
Upper
middle
81
General practice
100% male
100% genital
ulcer disease
Symptoms +
examination
HSV, true positive,
Haemophilus
ducreyi
M-PCR
13
12
28
28
Sanchez
et al. (7)
1995–
1996
Peru
Upper
middle
63
General practice
100% male
100% genital
ulcer disease
Symptoms +
examination
HSV, true positive,
Haemophilus
ducreyi
M-PCR
2
7
29
25
179
Annex 6. Evidence-to-decision table: genital ulcer disease
Table A6.2. Comparing the accuracy of clinical diagnosis of herpes with etiological diagnosis of herpes
Study
Year of
study
Country
Country
income
level
Sample
size
Where recruited
Subpopulation
How a positive
case is defined
Diagnostics
True
positive
False
negative
False
positive
True
negative
Behets et
al. (8)
1997
Madagascar
Low
196
Sexual health
clinic
71% men
Clinical diagnosisa
M-PCR
0
19
2
175
Behets et
al. (9)
1996
Jamaica
Upper
middle
304
Sexual Health
clinic
83% men
Clinical diagnosisa
M-PCR
85
73
24
122
Beyrer et al.
(10)
1995–
1996
Thailand
Upper
middle
38
Sexual health
clinic
79% female sex
workers
Clinical diagnosisa
M-PCR
21
11
3
3
Bhavsar et al.
(11)
2011–
2012
India
Lower
middle
96
Hospital
79% men
Clinical diagnosisa
Tzanck smear
IgM for HSV-2
33
0
38
25
Bogaerts et
al. (12)
1990–
1992
Rwanda
Low
395
General practice
63% men
History and
examination
Cytopathic
effect on Vero
cells
4
85
4
302
Bogaerts et
al. (12)
1990–
1992
Rwanda
Low
395
General practice
63% men
History and
examination +
syphilis serology
or darkfield
microscopy
Cytopathic
effect on Vero
cells
4
85
4
302
Bogaerts et
al. (13)
1990–
1992
Rwanda
Low
395
General practice
63% men
Clinical diagnosisa
Cytopathic
effect on Vero
cells
43
46
87
219
180
Guidelines for the management of symptomatic sexually transmitted infections
Study
Year of
study
Country
Country
income
level
Sample
size
Where recruited
Subpopulation
How a positive
case is defined
Diagnostics
True
positive
False
negative
False
positive
True
negative
DiCarlo &
Martin (13)
1990-
1992
United States
High
220
Sexual health
clinic
100% men
Clinical diagnosisa
Culture
20
37
10
153
Hina et al.
(14)
2015-
2016
India
Lower
middle
96
Sexual health
clinic
75% men
Clinical diagnosisa
Tzanck smears,
HSV2-IgM
33
2
36
25
Htun et al.
(15)
1993–
1994
Lesotho
Lower
middle
92
Sexual health
clinic
Clinical diagnosisa
MPCR
7
10
1
74
Htun et al.
(15)
1993–
1994
Lesotho
Lower
middle
92
Sexual health
clinic
Clinical diagnosisa
MPCR
5
19
3
65
Htun et al.
(15)
1993–
1994
Lesotho
Lower
middle
92
Sexual health
clinic
Clinical diagnosisa
MPCR
0
24
0
68
Prabhakar et
al. (16)
2008–
2009
India
Lower
middle
181
Sexual health
clinic
100% men
Clinical diagnosisa
M-PCR
59
31
37
54
Risbud et al.
(17)
1994
India
Lower
middle
302
Sexual health
clinic
Clinical diagnosisa
M-PCR
48
47
32
175
Sanchez et
al. (7)
1995–
1996
Dominican
Republic
Upper
middle
81
General practice
100% men
Clinical diagnosisa
M-PCR
19
16
10
36
Sanchez et
al. (7)
1995–
1996
Peru
Upper
middle
63
General practice
100% men
Clinical diagnosisa
M-PCR
15
12
17
19
181
Annex 6. Evidence-to-decision table: genital ulcer disease
Study
Year of
study
Country
Country
income
level
Sample
size
Where recruited
Subpopulation
How a positive
case is defined
Diagnostics
True
positive
False
negative
False
positive
True
negative
Wang et al.
(18)
1998–
1999
China
Upper
middle
96
Sexual health
clinic
52% men
Clinical diagnosisa
M-PCR
25
8
36
27
Wang et al.
(19)
2000–
2001
China
Upper
middle
227
Sexual health
clinic
90% men
Clinical diagnosisa
M-PCR
49
22
78
78
Fast et al.
(20)
1980
Kenya
Lower
middle
70
“Special
treatment clinic”
100% men
Clinical diagnosisa
Culture
3
3
1
63
Dangor et al.
(21)
Unclear
South Africa
Upper
middle
210
Hospital
100% men
Clinical diagnosisa
Culture
5
2
21
182
a A diagnostic test is the clinician’s diagnosis of herpes (rather than the presence of an ulcer). Clinical diagnosis is based on physical examination and history.
182
Guidelines for the management of symptomatic sexually transmitted infections
Table A6.3. Detection of syphilis using clinical diagnosis of syphilis in a population of individuals with genital ulcer disease
Study
Year of
study
Country
Country
income
level
Sample
size
Where recruited
Subpopulation
How a positive
case is defined
Diagnostics
True
positive
False
negative
False
positive
True
negative
Behets et
al. (8)
1997
Madagascar
Low
196
Sexual health
clinic
71% men
Clinical diagnosisa
M-PCR
52
4
112
28
Behets et
al. (9)
1996
Jamaica
Upper
middle
304
Sexual Health
clinic
83% men
Clinical diagnosisa
M-PCR
21
10
24
249
Beyrer et al.
(10)
1995–
1996
Thailand
Upper
middle
38
Sexual health
clinic
79% female
sex workers
Clinical diagnosisa
M-PCR
0
1
1
36
Bhavsar et al.
(11)
2011–
2012
India
Lower
middle
96
Hospital
79% men
Clinical diagnosisa
VDRL, TPHA
19
24
1
52
Bogaerts et
al. (12)
1990–
1992
Rwanda
Low
395
General practice
63% men
History and
examination
RPR, TPHA, Darkfield
microscopy
108
2
279
6
Bogaerts et
al. (12)
1990–
1992
Rwanda
Low
395
General practice
63% men
History and
examination +
syphilis serology
or darkfield
microscopy
RPR, TPHA, Darkfield
microscopy
107
3
9
276
Bogaerts et
al. (12)
1990–
1992
Rwanda
Low
395
General practice
63% men
Clinical diagnosisa
RPR, TPHA, Darkfield
microscopy
20
90
31
254
DiCarlo &
Martin (13)
1990–
1992
United States
High
220
Sexual health
clinic
100% men
Clinical diagnosisa
Darkfield microscopy
14
31
3
172
Hanson et al.
(22)
1996
Zambia
Lower
middle
95
Hospital
100% men
Clinical diagnosisa
Darkfield
microscopy, RPR,
TPHA
24
17
14
40
Hanson et al.
(22)
1996
Zambia
Lower
middle
131
Hospital
100% women
Clinical diagnosisa
Darkfield
microscopy, RPR,
TPHA
14
22
12
83
183
Annex 6. Evidence-to-decision table: genital ulcer disease
Study
Year of
study
Country
Country
income
level
Sample
size
Where recruited
Subpopulation
How a positive
case is defined
Diagnostics
True
positive
False
negative
False
positive
True
negative
Htun et al.
(15)
1993–
1994
Lesotho
Lower
middle
92
Sexual health
clinic
Clinical diagnosisa
MPCR, RPR, FTA-Abs
5
18
1
68
Htun et al.
(15)
1993–
1994
Lesotho
Lower
middle
92
Sexual health
clinic
Clinical diagnosisa
MPCR, RPR, FTA-Abs
30
4
52
6
Htun et al.
(15)
1993–
1994
Lesotho
Lower
middle
92
Sexual health
clinic
Clinical diagnosisa
MPCR, RPR, FTA-Abs
33
1
52
6
Ndinya-
Achola et al.
(23)
1990–
1991
Kenya
Lower
middle
172
Primary care
47% men
Clinical diagnosisa
RPR
6
18
19
129
Prabhakar et
al. (16)
2008–
2009
India
Lower
middle
181
Sexual health
clinic
100% men
Clinical diagnosisa
M-PCR
26
18
72
78
Sanchez et
al. (7)
1995–
1996
Dominican
Republic
Upper
middle
81
General practice
100% men
Clinical diagnosisa
M-PCR
2
2
11
66
Sanchez et
al. (7)
1995–
1996
Dominican
Republic
Upper
middle
63
General practice
100% men
Clinical diagnosisa
M-PCR
2
4
8
49
Wang et al.
(18)
1998–
1999
China
Upper
middle
96
Sexual health
clinic
100% had “STI
symptoms”
Clinical diagnosisa
M-PCR, RPR, TPPA
18
5
12
61
Wang et al.
(19)
2000-1
China
Upper
middle
227
Sexual health
clinic
90% men
Symptoms +
examination +
risk factors
M-PCR, Darkfield
microscopy, RPR,
TPPA
94
12
6
115
Fast et al.
(20)
1980
Kenya
Lower
middle
70
“Special
treatment clinic”
100% men
Clinical diagnosisa
RPR, Darkfield
microscopy
6
4
4
56
Dangor et al.
(21)
Unclear
South Africa
Upper
middle
210
Hospital
100% male
Clinical diagnosisa
RPR, fluorescent
treponemal antibody
absorption, darkfield
microscopy
22
3
25
160
a A diagnostic test is the clinician’s diagnosis of herpes (rather than the presence of an ulcer). Clinical diagnosis is based on physical examination and history.
184
Guidelines for the management of symptomatic sexually transmitted infections
Table A6.4. Detection of chancroid using clinical diagnosis of chancroid in a population with genital ulcer disease
Study
Year of
study
Country
Country
income
level
Sample
size
Where recruited
Subpopulation
How a positive
case is defined
Diagnostics
True
positive
False
negative
False
positive
True
negative
Behets et
al. (8)
1997
Madagascar
Low
196
Sexual health
clinic
71% men
100% genital
ulcer disease
Clinical diagnosisa
M-PCR
34
30
63
69
Behets et
al. (9)
1996
Jamaica
Upper
middle
304
Sexual Health
clinic
83% men
100% genital
ulcer disease
Clinical diagnosisa
M-PCR
54
18
57
175
Beyrer et al.
(10)
1995–
1996
Thailand
Upper
middle
38
Sexual health
clinic
79% female
sex workers
100% genital
ulcer disease
Clinical diagnosisa
M-PCR
0
0
6
32
Bhavsar et al.
(11)
2011–
2012
India
Lower
middle
96
Hospital
79% men
100% genital
ulcer disease
Clinical diagnosisa
Gram stain
2
1
1
92
Bogaerts et
al. (12)
1990–
1992
Rwanda
Low
395
General practice
63% men
100% genital
ulcer disease
History and
examination
Culture
115
0
272
8
Bogaerts et
al. (12)
1990-
1992
Rwanda
Low
395
General practice
63% men
100% genital
ulcer disease
History and
examination +
syphilis serology
or darkfield
microscopy
Culture
83
32
188
92
Bogaerts et
al. (12)
1990–
1992
Rwanda
Low
395
General practice
63% men
100% genital
ulcer disease
Clinical diagnosisa
Culture
74
41
67
213
DiCarlo &
Martin (13)
1990–
1992
USA
High
220
Sexual health
clinic
100% men
100% genital
ulcer disease
Clinical diagnosisa
Culture
40
78
6
96
185
Annex 6. Evidence-to-decision table: genital ulcer disease
Study
Year of
study
Country
Country
income
level
Sample
size
Where recruited
Subpopulation
How a positive
case is defined
Diagnostics
True
positive
False
negative
False
positive
True
negative
Htun et al.
(15)
1993–
1994
Lesotho
Lower
middle
92
Sexual health
clinic
100% genital
ulcer disease
Clinical diagnosisa
MPCR
54
2
22
14
Htun et al.
(15)
1993-
1994
Lesotho
Lower
middle
92
Sexual health
clinic
100% genital
ulcer disease
Clinical diagnosisa
MPCR
51
4
31
6
Htun et al.
(15)
1993–
1994
Lesotho
Lower
middle
92
Sexual health
clinic
100% genital
ulcer disease
Clinical diagnosisa
MPCR
53
3
32
4
Ndinya-
Achola et al.
(23)
1990-
1991
Kenya
Lower
middle
156
Primary care
47% men
100% genital
ulcer disease
Clinical diagnosisa
Culture
51
5
76
24
Prabhakar et
al. (16)
2008–
2009
India
Lower
middle
181
Sexual health
clinic
100% men
100% genital
ulcer disease
Clinical diagnosisa
M-PCR
59
31
37
54
Risbud et al.
(17)
1994
India
Lower
middle
302
Sexual health
clinic
100% genital
ulcer disease
Clinical diagnosisa
M-PCR
53
31
76
142
Sanchez et
al. (7)
1995–
1996
Dominican
Republic
Upper
middle
81
General practice
100% men
100% genital
ulcer disease
Clinical diagnosisa
M-PCR
11
10
17
43
Sanchez et
al. (7)
1995–
1996
Peru
Upper
middle
63
General practice
100% men
100% genital
ulcer disease
Clinical diagnosisa
M-PCR
0
3
21
39
Fast et al.
(20)
1980
Kenya
Lower
middle
70
“Special
treatment clinic”
100% men
100% genital
ulcer disease
Clinical diagnosisa
Culture
42
6
8
14
Dangor et al.
(20)
Unclear
South Africa
Upper
middle
210
Hospital
100% genital
ulcer disease
Clinical diagnosisa
117
30
14
49
a A diagnostic test is the clinician’s diagnosis of herpes (rather than the presence of an ulcer). Clinical diagnosis is based on physical examination and history.
186
Guidelines for the management of symptomatic sexually transmitted infections
ANNEX 7. EVIDENCE-TO-DECISION TABLE:
ANORECTAL DISCHARGE
Should the current WHO syndromic management approach
be recommended versus laboratory diagnosis, no
treatment and treat all to identify sexually transmitted
infections among people with anorectal discharge?
Population:
Men and women (cis-men, cis-women,
trans-women and transmen) presenting
with anorectal discharge
Intervention and comparator:
Intervention: current WHO syndromic
approach versus comparison: laboratory
diagnosis (or no treatment or treat all)
Purpose of the test:
To detect Neisseria gonorrhoeae and/or
Chlamydia trachomatis; herpes simplex virus
(HSV); C. trachomatis (serovars L1, L2 and
L3) causing lymphogranuloma venereum
and Mycoplasma genitalium
Linked treatments:
Treatments for anorectal infections
(see above)
Anticipated outcomes:
Number of people identified correctly as
having or not having STI; number of people
identified incorrectly as having or not
having STI; consequences of appropriate
or inappropriate treatment; patient and
provider acceptability, feasibility, equity and
resource use
Setting:
Outpatient
Perspective:
Population level
Subgroups:
High- or low-prevalence settings; settings
with limited versus established laboratory
capacity; key populations: sex workers,
men who have sex with men , transgender
people, people living with HIV
Background:
Syndromic management refers to a
strategy to identify and treat people
with STIs based on specific symptoms
identified by a patient and signs (clinically
observed signs of infection) associated
with clearly defined causes. Although
etiological diagnosis is preferred, it is not
always accessible or affordable.
Fig. A7.1 shows clinical guidelines for
the syndromic management of anorectal
syndrome in the 2003 WHO guidelines for
the management of sexually transmitted
infections.
187
Annex 7. Evidence-to-decision table: anorectal discharge
Assessment
Judgement
Research evidence
Problem
Is the problem a priority?
No
Probably no
Probably yes
Yes
Varies
Don’t know
Anorectal infection
Anorectal STIs are possible for individuals practising anal sex. Among men
who have sex with men, anorectal STIs are relatively common and frequently
asymptomatic but can cause proctitis, presenting as anal discharge and/or
pain. Possible causes include N. gonorrhoeae and C. trachomatis including
lymphogranuloma venereum, herpes simplex viruses (HSV-1, HSV-2)
and Treponema pallidum (true positive). Proctitis can also be caused by
non-infectious reasons. An individual with anorectal infections may also
have concomitant infection at other anatomical sites. There is concern
that, if people with anorectal STIs are not treated, this could increase HIV
acquisition through inflammation and increased viral shedding.
High cost of molecular STI testing
Cheaper platforms, near-patient or point-of-care tests are needed for
C. trachomatis and N. gonorrhoeae.
Antimicrobial resistance
There is increasing concern about the treatment of people with
N. gonorrhoeae, since high rates of resistance to penicillin, tetracycline,
and quinolone have been documented globally. Resistance to commonly
used first-line medications (azithromycin) and reports of treatment failure
and reduced susceptibility in N. gonorrhoeae to cephalosporin (a last-line
treatment for N. gonorrhoeae) raise concern that N. gonorrhoeae could
become untreatable.
Test accuracy
How accurate is the test?
Very inaccurate
Inaccurate
Accurate
Very accurate
Varies
Don’t know
We conducted a systematic review, searching up to September 2019, of the
sensitivity and specificity of a syndromic management approach to identify
multiple STIs related to anorectal discharge. In summary, we identified
four studies that assessed the diagnostic accuracy of anorectal syndromic
management to detect any STI (Table A7.1), five studies for anorectal
chlamydia (Table A7.2) and five studies for anorectal gonorrhoea (Table
A7.3).
For detection of any STIs (chlamydia or gonorrhoea), four studies
provided five estimates for pooling. The pooled sensitivity for detecting
anal chlamydia or gonorrhoea using a syndromic management approach
(anorectal syndrome) is 32.4% (95% CI: 11.4–64.0%), and pooled specificity
is 81.7% (95% CI: 43.1–96.43%).
For detection of specific STIs
For detection of anal chlamydia, five estimates were available to pool.
The pooled sensitivity for detecting anal chlamydia using a syndromic
management approach is 11.1% (95% CI: 2.2–40.3%), and pooled specificity
is 94.8% (95% CI: 87.1–98.0%).
For detection of anal gonorrhoea, five studies providing five estimates were
available to pool; the pooled sensitivity for detecting anal gonorrhoea using
a syndromic management approach is 14.2% (95% CI: 6.1–29.7%), and
pooled specificity is 94.4% (95% CI: 84.8–98.1%).
For detection of herpes or syphilis, no estimates were found for evaluating
the accuracy of syndromic management.
For detection of lymphogranuloma venereum, one study among men who
have sex with men from sexual health clinics in the Netherlands provided
an estimate for the sensitivity of syndromic management to detect
lymphogranuloma venereum: 4.6% (95% CI: 1.3–11.4%) (7).
Prevalence can vary widely (anorectal N. gonorrhoeae: 0.2–24%, anorectal
C. trachomatis 2.1–23%) (8–14), and there are behavioural and network
correlates of those with greater likelihood of an STI (15). Men who have sex
with men are not homogeneous.
188
Guidelines for the management of symptomatic sexually transmitted infections
Judgement
Research evidence
Test accuracy
The evidence for the value of adding risk assessment to the history of
symptoms is mixed.
A study from India to detect anorectal C. trachomatis and N. gonorrhoeae
among 508 patients (in 2008–2009) reported the accuracy for detecting
C. trachomatis and N. gonorrhoeae in algorithms that used: (1) anorectal
symptoms only (sensitivity of 0.8%), (2) receptive anal sex and/or anorectal
discharge (sensitivity 41.7%, specificity 66.3%, positive predictive value
17.5%) and (3) addition of risk assessment (sensitivity 81.9%, specificity
20.1%, positive predictive value 14.9%) (1).
A study of 698 men who have sex with men in Kenya (2) explored model-
derived risk score based on correlates of anorectal C. trachomatis or
N. gonorrhoeae. The risk score was based on three correlates (age 18–24
years versus ≥25 years (2 points), people living with HIV (2 points) and
condomless sex with a male partner (1 point). They report a sensitivity
of 81% and specificity of 66%, with a number needed to treat of 12 for
anorectal C. trachomatis or N. gonorrhoeae that might be possible in their
context for asymptomatic men who have sex with men (see the table
below). The correlates of anorectal C. trachomatis and N. gonorrhoeae
among symptomatic men were people living with HIV (adjusted odds ratio
(aOR) 17.1 [95% confidence interval (CI) 3.5–84]), receptive anal sex (aOR
53.5 [95% CI 6.4–444.9]) and versatile sex position (aOR 24.2 [95% CI
2.0–294.8]).
Sensitivity, Specificity, NNT and Predictive Values of Risk Score at Different Cut Points
Risk
Score
Cut Point
Sensitivity
Specificity
Proportion
Offered PT
NNT
PPV
NPV
1
95.2%
12.3%
88.0%
36
4.3%
98.4%
2
85.7%
39.5%
61.4%
24
5.5%
98.5%
3
81.0%
66.1%
35.7%
12
8.9%
98.8%
4
28.6%
97.5%
3.6%
3
31.6%
97.1%
5
19.1%
98.8%
1.9%
2
40.0%
96.7%
Abbreviations: NNT = number needed to treat; NPV = negative predictive value;
PPV = positive predictive value
However, a study of 787 men who have sex with men from Peru (in 2012–
2014) reported that most anorectal C. trachomatis or N. gonorrhoeae were
detected in men with no relevant risk behaviour with their three most recent
sex partners (6). Other studies (8) also suggest that adding risk factors may
not increase the accuracy of syndromic management, and its value should be
assessed in specific contexts.
Desirable effects
How substantial are the
desirable anticipated
effects of syndromic
approach?
Trivial
Small
Moderate
Large
Varies
Don’t know
Desirable effects and undesirable effects
The potential consequences of true positive could include appropriate treatment,
cure, side-effects, partner notification, reduced transmission of STI and HIV,
resistance, couple difficulties and costs.
The potential consequences of true negative could include alternative diagnoses
possible and psychological benefit.
The potential consequences of false negative could include cure still possible,
persistent symptoms, complications, STI and/or HIV transmission, no counselling
and no partner notification.
The potential consequences of false positive could include inappropriate
treatment, side-effects, antimicrobial resistance, couple difficulties and costs.
Based on the sensitivity and specificity of anorectal syndrome to detect STIs,
we calculated the number of people appropriately treated (true positive), the
number of missed cases (false negative) and the number of people treated
unnecessarily or overtreated (false positive)
189
Annex 7. Evidence-to-decision table: anorectal discharge
Judgement
Research evidence
Undesirable effects
How substantial are the
undesirable anticipated
effects?
Large
Moderate
Small
Trivial
Varies
Don’t know
GRADE summary of findings tables: detection of any chlamydia or
gonorrhoea using anorectal discharge
Pooled sensitivity: 0.32 (95% CI: 0.11 to 0.64)
Pooled specificity: 0.82 (95% CI: 0.43 to 0.96)
Test result
Number of results per 100
patients tested (95% CI)
Number of
participants
(studies)
Certainty of
the Evidence
(GRADE)
Prevalence 20%
Typically seen in
Prevalence 50%
Typically seen in
True positives
6 (2 to 13)
16 (6 to 32)
2010
(4)
Moderatea
False negatives
14 (7 to 18)
34 (18 to 44)
True negatives
65 (34 to 77)
41 (22 to 48)
2010
(4)
Moderatea
False positives
15 (3 to 46)
9 (2 to 28)
CI: Confidence interval
Explanations
a There was high heterogeneity across studies resulting in wide confidence.
A false positive diagnosis could cause STI-related stigma for the patient and
their sexual partner(s), and they might take unnecessary antibiotics, with
potential risks of adverse side-effects and contributing to the development of
antimicrobial resistance.
Overtreatment is a key consideration. Antibiotic use can exert selection
pressure, giving resistant strains advantage over susceptible strains, increasing
the development of resistance. Resource-limited settings are an incubator of
antimicrobial-resistant STIs since they have large STI burdens (16).
Increasing consumption of antibiotics (both humans and animals) (17), reliance
on syndromic STI management, weaker health systems and limited regulations
for governing the access, use and quality of antibiotics.
Considerations for certainty of test accuracy
Evidence is derived largely from men who have sex with men; heterosexual
women also practise receptive anal sex, but there are no data on syndromic
management of anorectal syndrome for women.
Certainty of the evidence
of test accuracy
What is the overall certainty
of the evidence of test
accuracy?
Very low
Low
Moderate
High
No included studies
Certainty of the evidence of
the effects of management
What is the overall
certainty of the
evidence of effects of
the management that is
guided by the test results?
Very low
Low
Moderate
High
No included studies
We have evidence for treatment of the STIs related to anorectal discharge.
Certainty of effects
What is the overall
certainty of the evidence
of effects of the test?
Very low
Low
Moderate
High
No included studies
190
Guidelines for the management of symptomatic sexually transmitted infections
Judgement
Research evidence
Values
Is there important
uncertainty about or
variability in how much
people value the main
outcomes?
Important uncertainty or
variability
Possibly important
uncertainty or variability
Probably no important
uncertainty or variability
No important uncertainty
or variability
The Guideline Development Group placed greater value on the false negatives
(missed cases) than on the false positives (people unnecessarily treated).
Balance of effects
Does the balance
between desirable and
undesirable effects favour
the intervention or the
comparison?
Favours the comparison
Probably favours the
comparison
Does not favour either
the intervention or the
comparison
Probably favours the
intervention
Favours the intervention
Varies
Don’t know
Although fewer people would be treated unnecessarily if the previous WHO
syndromic management approach were used, there would be more missed
cases compared with treating all, and greater value was placed on avoiding
missed cases. In addition, there would be no missed cases or unnecessary
treatment if molecular testing is used.
The Guideline Development Group therefore agreed that the balance of
benefits and harm favours treating all or molecular testing.
Resources required
How large are the resource
requirements (costs)?
Large costs
Moderate costs
Negligible costs and savings
Moderate savings
Large savings
Varies
Don’t know
We did not identify studies that evaluated the cost of anorectal syndrome
management.
Korenromp (18) reported the unit costs of diagnostic and treatment commodities:
STI
Treatment
Dose
per
day
Treatment
duration
Drugs,
per
dose
Drugs +
service
delivery
Gonorrhoea
Ceftriaxone
250 mg
1
1 day
US$ 0.57
US$
10.71
Chlamydia
Azithromycin
500 mg
2
1 day
US$ 0.38
US$
10.95
Trichomoniasis
Metronidazole
500 mg
4
1 day
US$ 0.01
US$
10.05
Diagnostic test
Gonorrhoea
and chlamydia
NAAT: assuming a price reduction starting 2016,
from US$ 20 as of 2016 (specimen collection in
primary care; testing in secondary and tertiary
care facilities)
US$
12.00a
Trichomoniasis
Wet mount (point of care)
US$ 4.00
a Current cost of NAAT US$ 16.
There are negligible differences in costs when treating all or when using the
previous WHO syndromic approach, but the greatest cost with molecular testing.
191
Annex 7. Evidence-to-decision table: anorectal discharge
Judgement
Research evidence
Certainty of evidence of
required resources
What is the certainty of
the evidence of resource
requirements (costs)?
Very low
Low
Moderate
High
No included studies
No studies identified.
Cost–effectiveness
Does the cost–
effectiveness of the
intervention favour
the intervention or the
comparison?
Favours the comparison
Probably favours the
comparison
Does not favour either
the intervention or the
comparison
Probably favours the
intervention
Favours the intervention
Varies
No included studies
No studies identified.
The Guideline Development Group agreed that, based on cost–effectiveness,
treating all (the comparison) is favoured rather than the previous WHO
syndromic approach.
Equity
What would be the impact
on health equity?
Reduced
Probably reduced
Probably no impact
Probably increased
Increased
Varies
Don’t know
Most studies (seven of eight) involved men who have sex with men. We
only identified one study that examined the accuracy of anorectal syndromic
management among 345 trans-women in Brazil for detecting C. trachomatis
and N. gonorrhoeae (in 2015–2016) (5). In this study population, 48% were
reported to be current sex workers. Those who reported more than five
sexual partners in the preceding six months had higher odds for anorectal
C. trachomatis (aOR 2.5 [0.9–6.9].
One study evaluated the value of presumptive treatment of anorectal
C. trachomatis or N. gonorrhoeae (diagnosed using NAAT) among 277 men
who have sex with men who were sex workers in Kenya (19). Among this
high-risk group of men, one of 10 would have asymptomatic C. trachomatis or
N. gonorrhoeae.
A study of 698 men who have sex with men in Kenya reported that those with
higher risk of anorectal C. trachomatis or N. gonorrhoeae were asymptomatic
men aged 18–24 years (aOR 7.6 [1.7–33.2]), people living with HIV (aOR 6.9
[2.2–21.6]) and men who had condomless anal sex in the preceding three
months (aOR 3.8 [1.2–11.9]) (2).
192
Guidelines for the management of symptomatic sexually transmitted infections
Judgement
Research evidence
Acceptability
Is the intervention
acceptable to key
stakeholders?
No
Probably no
Probably yes
Yes
Varies
Don’t know
No studies were identified.
Feasibility
Is the intervention feasible
to implement?
No
Probably no
Probably yes
Yes
Varies
Don’t know
No studies were identified.
193
Annex 7. Evidence-to-decision table: anorectal discharge
Summary of judgements
Judgement
Problem
No
Probably no
Probably
yes
Yes
Varies
Don’t know
Test accuracy
Very
inaccurate
Inaccurate
Accurate
Very
accurate
Varies
Don’t know
Desirable
effects
Trivial
Small
Moderate
Large
Varies
Don’t know
Undesirable
effects
Large
Moderate
Small
Trivial
Varies
Don’t know
Certainty of
the evidence of
test accuracy
Very low
Low
Moderate
High
No included
studies
Certainty of
the evidence of
the effects of
management
Very low
Low
Moderate
High
No included
studies
Certainty of
effects
Very low
Low
Moderate
High
No included
studies
Values
Important
uncertainty
or
variability
Possibly
important
uncertainty
or
variability
Probably no
important
uncertainty
or
variability
No
important
uncertainty
or
variability
Balance of
effects
Favours the
comparison
Probably
favours the
comparison
Does not
favour
either the
intervention
or the
comparison
Probably
favours the
intervention
Favours the
intervention
Varies
Don’t know
Resources
required
Large costs
Moderate
costs
Negligible
costs and
savings
Moderate
savings
Large
savings
Varies
Don’t know
Certainty
of evidence
of required
resources
Very low
Low
Moderate
High
No included
studies
Cost–
effectiveness
Favours the
comparison
Probably
favours the
comparison
Does not
favour
either the
intervention
or the
comparison
Probably
favours the
intervention
Favours the
intervention
Varies
No included
studies
Equity
Reduced
Probably
reduced
Probably no
impact
Probably
increased
Increased
Varies
Don’t know
Acceptability
No
Probably no
Probably
yes
Yes
Varies
Don’t know
Feasibility
No
Probably no
Probably
yes
Yes
Varies
Don’t know
194
Guidelines for the management of symptomatic sexually transmitted infections
Conclusions
Should the current WHO syndromic management approach be recommended versus
laboratory diagnosis, no treatment and treat all to identify sexually transmitted
infections among people with anorectal discharge?
Type of
recommendation
Strong
recommendation
against the
intervention
Conditional
recommendation
against the
intervention
Conditional
recommendation for
either the intervention
or the comparison
Conditional
recommendation
for the
intervention
Strong
recommendation
for the intervention
Recommendation
Recommendations for management of anorectal discharge
For people with symptom of anorectal discharge and report receptive anal sex, we recommend
management based on the results of quality-assured molecular assays. However, in settings with
limited or no molecular tests or laboratory capacity, we recommend syndromic treatment to ensure
treatment on the same day of the visit.
Good practice includes:
•	 taking a medical and sexual history and assessing the risk of STIs;
•	 performing a physical examination of the genital and perianal areas and a digital rectal
examination, if acceptable (and anoscopy, if available and acceptable);
•	 offering HIV and syphilis testing and other preventive services as recommended in other
guidelines; and
•	 referring for other investigations when anorectal discharge is unrelated to a sexually
transmitted infection, such as other gastrointestinal conditions.
Settings with quality-assured molecular testing in a laboratory with a fully operational quality
management system and results available on the same day of the visit
We recommend the following.
1.	Perform molecular assays (nucleic acid amplification test (NAAT)) using a self-collected or
clinician-collected anorectal swab to confirm or exclude infection with N. gonorrhoeae and/or
C. trachomatis and treat the individual infections detected.
2.	Treat, additionally, for herpes simplex virus if there is anorectal pain.
3.	Follow the genital ulcer guidelines if ulceration is present.
Settings in which same-day treatment is not feasible with molecular testing or with limited or no
molecular testing
We suggest the following.
•	 Treat for N. gonorrhoeae and C. trachomatis if discharge is present.
•	 Treat, additionally, for herpes simplex virus if there is anorectal pain.
Good practice includes.
•	 Following the genital ulcer guidelines if ulceration is present.
•	 Referring people with persistent anorectal discharge to a centre with laboratory capacity to
diagnose N. gonorrhoeae, C. trachomatis (including lymphogranuloma venereum serovars) and
M. genitalium and determine antimicrobial resistance for N. gonorrhoeae and M. genitalium.
Justification
Managing people presenting with anorectal discharge based on a syndromic approach results
in small benefits and moderate harm compared with molecular testing or treating all. Molecular
testing may not be feasible in all settings and, alternatively, treating all would be feasible and the
costs would be negligible. Treating all or conducting molecular testing would be acceptable to all
and would not negatively affect equity (in some settings, it may increase equity).
195
Annex 7. Evidence-to-decision table: anorectal discharge
References
1.
Mugundu PR, Narayanan P, Das A, Morineau G. Assessing syndromic management algorithms
for the diagnosis of rectal chlamydia and gonorrhoeae among men who have sex with men
clinic attendees from two cities in India. Sex Transm Infect. 2013;89(Suppl. 1).
2.	 Quilter LAS, Obondi E, Kunzweiler C, Okall D, Bailey RC, Djomand G et al. Prevalence and
correlates of and a risk score to identify asymptomatic anorectal gonorrhoea and chlamydia
infection among men who have sex with men in Kisumu, Kenya. Sex Transm Infect.
2019;95:201–11.
3.	 Rebe K, Lewis D, Myer L, de Swardt G, Struthers H, Kamkuemah M et al. A cross sectional
analysis of gonococcal and chlamydial infections among men-who-have-sex-with-men in Cape
Town, South Africa. PLoS One. 2015;10:e0138315.
4.	 Sanders EJ, Wahome E, Okuku HS, Thiong’o AN, Smith AD, Duncan S et al. Evaluation of
WHO screening algorithm for the presumptive treatment of asymptomatic rectal gonorrhoea
and chlamydia infections in at-risk men who have sex with men in Kenya. Sex Transm Infect.
2014;90:94–9.
5.	 Caracas C, Jalil EM, Garcia ACF, Nazer SC, De Oliveira LP, Veloso V et al. High chlamydia and
gonorrhea prevalences and low performance of syndromic management among Brazilian trans-
women. AIDS Res Hum Retrovirus. 2018;34(Suppl. 1):240.
6.	 Passaro RC, Segura ER, Perez-Brumer A, Cabeza J, Montano SM, Lake JE et al. Body parts
matter: social, behavioral, and biological considerations for urethral, pharyngeal, and rectal
gonorrhea and chlamydia screening among men who have sex with men in Lima, Peru. Sex
Transm Infect. 2018;45:607–14.
7.
Van der Bij AK, Spaargaren J, Morre SA, Fennema HS, Mindel A, Coutinho RA et al. Diagnostic
and clinical implications of anorectal lymphogranuloma venereum in men who have sex with
men: a retrospective case-control study. Clin Infect Dis. 2006;42:186–94.
8.	 Chan PA, Robinette A, Montgomery M, Almonte A, Cu-Uvin S, Lonks JR et al. Extragenital
infections caused by Chlamydia trachomatis and Neisseria gonorrhoeae: a review of the
literature. Infect Dis Obstet Gynecol. 2016;2016:5758387.
9.	 Kent CK, Chaw JK, Wong W, Liska S, Gibson S, Hubbard G et al. Prevalence of rectal, urethral,
and pharyngeal chlamydia and gonorrhea detected in 2 clinical settings among men who have
sex with men: San Francisco, California, 2003. Clin Infect Dis. 2005;41:67–74.
196
Guidelines for the management of symptomatic sexually transmitted infections
10.	 Soni S, White JA. Self-screening for Neisseria gonorrhoeae and Chlamydia trachomatis in the
human immunodeficiency virus clinic – high yields and high acceptability. Sex Transm Dis.
2011;38:1107–9.
11.	 Turner AN, Reese PC, Ervin M, Davis JA, Fields KS, Bazan JA. HIV, rectal chlamydia, and rectal
gonorrhea in men who have sex with men attending a sexually transmitted disease clinic in a
midwestern US city. Sex Transm Dis. 2013;40:433–8.
12.	 Ross MW, Nyoni J, Ahaneku HO, Mbwambo J, McClelland RS, McCurdy SA. High HIV
seroprevalence, rectal STIs and risky sexual behaviour in men who have sex with men in Dar es
Salaam and Tanga, Tanzania. BMJ Open. 2014;4:e006175.
13.	 Kim EJ, Hladik W, Barker J, Lubwama G, Sendagala S, Ssenkusu JM et al. Sexually transmitted
infections associated with alcohol use and HIV infection among men who have sex with men in
Kampala, Uganda. Sex Transm Infect. 2016;92:240–5.
14.	 Muraguri N, Tun W, Okal J, Broz D, Raymond HF, Kellogg T et al. HIV and STI prevalence
and risk factors among male sex workers and other men who have sex with men in
Nairobi, Kenya. J Acquir Immune Defic Syndr. 2015;68:91–6.
15.	 Katz DA, Dombrowski JC, Bell TR, Kerani RP, Golden MR. HIV incidence among men who
have sex with men after diagnosis with sexually transmitted infections. Sex Transm Dis.
2016;43:249–54.
16.	 Rowley J, Vander Hoorn S, Korenromp E, Low N, Unemo M, Abu-Raddad LJ et al. Chlamydia,
gonorrhoea, trichomoniasis and syphilis: global prevalence and incidence estimates, 2016. Bull
World Health Organ. 2019;97:548–62.
17.	 Van Boeckel TP, Gandra S, Ashok A, Caudron Q, Grenfell BT, Levin SA et al. Global antibiotic
consumption 2000 to 2010: an analysis of national pharmaceutical sales data. Lancet Infect Dis.
2014;14:742–50.
18.	 Korenromp EL, Wi T, Resch S, Stover J, Broutet N. Costing of national STI program
implementation for the global STI control strategy for the health sector, 2016–2021. PLoS One.
2017;12:e0170773.
19.	 Okuku HS, Wahome E, Duncan S, Thiongo A, Mwambi J, Sahfi J et al. Evaluation of presumptive
treatment recommendation for asymptomatic anorectal gonorrhoea and chlamydia infections
in at-risk men who have sex with men in Kenya. J Int AIDS Soc. 2012;15:99.
197
Annex 7. Evidence-to-decision table: anorectal discharge
Fig. A7.1. Current WHO syndromic approach to the management of
anorectal syndrome
Take history* and do physical examination
Patient with passive anal sex in last 6 months
and/or anal symptoms
Yes
Yes
No
No
Treat for HSV-2
plus GONORRHOEA
AND CHLAMYDIA
Treat for GONORRHOEA
AND CHLAMYDIA
OTHER
MANAGEMENT?
*History of GI conditions? Suggestive of GI
** Risk: unprotected anal intercourse last 6 months,
plus
– Partner with STI; or
– Multiple partners
Follow up after 1 week. If symptoms persist:
– Treat for LGV;
– Treat for HSV;
– Refer
No
No
Yes
Yes
Ano-rectal ulcer?
Anal discharge?
Anal/perineal pain?
Risk** assessment positive?
198
Guidelines for the management of symptomatic sexually transmitted infections
Table A7.1. Detection of any STI for anorectal syndrome
Study
Year of
study
Country
Country
income
level
Sample
size
Where recruited
Subpopulation
How a positive
case is defined
Pathogens and test
True
positive
False
negative
False
positive
True
negative
Mugundu et
al. (1)
2008–
2009
India
Lower
middle
868
Sexual health
clinic
100% men
who have sex
with men
Receptive anal
sex and/or anal
discharge +
subsequent
proctoscopy ±
smear findings
C. trachomatis and
N. gonorrhoeae
NAAT – Roche
Amplicor
53
74
250
491
Mugundu et
al. (1)
2008–
2009
India
Lower
middle
868
Sexual health
clinic
100% men
who have sex
with men
Adding “risk
assessment” to
above
104
23
592
149
Quilter et
al. (2)
Unclear
Kenya
Lower
middle
698
Community
settings
99% men who
have sex with
men
Anal symptoms +
“risk assessment”
(model-derived
risk score)
C. trachomatis and
N. gonorrhoeae
NAAT – Abbott
Realtime
15
21
151
511
Rebe et al. (3)
2012
South Africa
Upper
middle
200
Sexual health
clinic
100% men
who have sex
with men
Symptoms only
C. trachomatis and
N. gonorrhoeae,
Aptima Combo 2
9
38
13
140
Sanders et
al. (4)
2011–
2012
Kenya
Lower
middle
244
Unclear
100% men
who have sex
with men
Symptoms + “risk
assessment”
C. trachomatis and
N. gonorrhoeae
Aptima Combo 2
3
28
1
212
199
Annex 7. Evidence-to-decision table: anorectal discharge
Table A7.2. Detection of anal gonorrhoea for anorectal syndrome
Study
Year of
study
Country
Country
income
level
Sample
size
Where recruited
Subpopulation
How a positive
case is defined
Diagnostic
True
positive
False
negative
False
positive
True
negative
Caracas et
al. (5)
2015–
2016
Brazil
Upper
middle
345
Unclear
100% trans-women
Symptoms only
Not reported
4
43
26
272
Passaro et
al. (6)
2012–
2014
Peru
Upper
middle
787
Unclear
100% men who have
sex with men
Symptoms only
NAAT
3
62
16
706
Quilter et
al. (2)
Unclear
Kenya
Lower
middle
698
Community
settings
99% men who have
sex with men
Anal symptoms +
“risk assessment”
(model-derived
risk score)
12
15
154
517
Rebe et al. (3)
2012
South Africa
Upper
middle
200
Sexual health
clinic
100% men who have
sex with men
Symptoms only
3
14
19
164
Sanders et
al. (4)
2011–
2012
Kenya
Lower
middle
19
Unclear
100% men who have
sex with men
Symptoms + “risk
assessment”
4
3
11
1
200
Guidelines for the management of symptomatic sexually transmitted infections
Table A7.3. Detection of anal chlamydia for anorectal syndrome
Study
Year of
study
Country
Country
income
level
Sample
size
Where recruited
Subpopulation
How a positive
case is defined
Diagnostic
True
positive
False
negative
False
positive
True
negative
Caracas et
al. (5)
2015–
2016
Brazil
Upper
middle
345
Unclear
100% trans-women
Symptoms only
Not reported
22
28
8
287
Passaro et
al. (6)
2012–
2014
Peru
Upper
middle
787
Unclear
100% men who have
sex with men
Symptoms only
NAAT
3
122
16
646
Quilter et
al. (2)
Unclear
Kenya
Lower
middle
698
Community
settings
99% men who have
sex with men
Anal symptoms +
“risk assessment”
(model-derived
risk score)
8
11
158
521
Rebe et al. (3)
2012
South Africa
Upper
middle
200
Sexual health
clinic
100% men who have
sex with men
Symptoms only
2
14
20
164
Sanders et
al. (4)
2011–
2012
Kenya
Lower
middle
244
Unclear
100% men who have
sex with men
Symptoms + “risk
assessment”
0
20
4
220
201
ANNEX 8. SUPPLEMENTAL MATERIALS
Systematic review for urethral discharge
Systematic review for vaginal discharge
Systematic review for risk factors for gonorrhoea
and chlamydial infection
Systematic review for lower abdominal discharge
Systematic review for genital ulcer
Systematic review for anorectal discharge
The role of Mycoplasma genitalium in acute and
recurrent urethritis and pelvic inflammatory disease
Description of modelling of vaginal discharge
For more information, contact:
World Health Organization
Department of Global HIV,
Hepatitis and STI Programme
20, avenue Appia
1211 Geneva 27
Switzerland
Email: hiv-aids@who.int
www.who.int/hiv